               Contents 
              Section    Content                                                           Page 
                         Emergency Procedures - inside front cover                          
                         *Foreword                                                         3 
                         Statement of University’s General Policy                          4 
              1          Administrative Organisation of Safety                             5 
                         *1.1 University Arrangements, 1.2 Safety Committees, 1.3 Local 
                         Management and Organisational Arrangements, 1.4 Role of 
                         Individuals 
              2          Emergencies                                                       9 
              3          Fire Precautions                                                  10 
                         3.1 Use of Extinguishers, 3.2 Reporting of Fire, 3.3 Fire Evacuation 
                         and Fire Token Procedure, 3.4 Fire Response Procedure, 3.5 Hazard 
                         Information, 3.6 Emergency Evacuation of Persons with Disabilities 
              4          Emergency First Aid Treatment                                     16 
                         *4.1 General Arrangements, 4.2 First Aid Boxes,4.3 First Aid 
                         Training, *4.4 First Aid Treatment of Casualties, *4.5 Defibrillators 
              5          Reporting of Accidents                                            21 
                         5.1 HSE Requirements, *5.2 University Requirements 
              6          General Precautions                                               23 
                         6.1 Risk Management, *6.2 University Codes of Practice and 
                         Guidance, 6.3 Role of Occupational Health, *6.4 Slips & Trips  
                         6.5  Office Safety, 6.6 Display Screen Equipment, 6.7 Manual 
                         Handling, 6.8 Psychological Wellbeing & the Avoidance & 
                         Management of Stress, 6.9  New and Expectant Mothers,  
                         6.10  Smoking, 6.11 Alcohol and Drugs, 6.12 Children and Young 
                         Persons on University Premises, 6.13 Adult Companion Assisting in 
                         University Work, *6.14 University Residences, 6.15 Work Areas  
                         6.16 Entry into Hazardous Areas by Maintenance Workers,  
                         6.17 Management of Asbestos, 6.18 Confined Spaces, 6.19 Working 
                         at Height, 6.20 Respirable crystalline silica, 6.21 Disposal of Waste 
                         Material, 6.22 Out of Hours Working, 6.23 Lone Working, 6.24 Work 
                         Experience,  6.25 Team Building Events, 6.26 Industrial Visits, 6.27 
                         Student Placements, 6.28 Working Overseas, 6.29 Fieldwork, 
                          6.30 Diving Operations, 6.31 Threatening or Violent Situation, 6.32 
                         Driving on University Business, 6.33 Minibus Driving, 6.34 Use of 
                         Mobile Phones Whilst Driving. 
              7          Precautions with Work Equipment                                   46       
                         *7.1 Statutory Requirements, 7.2 Clothing, 7.3 Guarding, 
                         7.4 Noise, 7.5 Abrasive Wheels, 7.6 Welding,  
                         7.7 Hotwork, *7.8 Compressed Gases, 7.9 Paint Spraying,  
                         7.10 Woodworking Machinery, 7.11 Centrifuges,  
                         7.12 Ladders, 7.13 Lifting Equipment, 7.14 Pressure Systems,  
              Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                      1 
                           7.15 Autoclaves, 7.16 Vehicles, 7.17 Vibration, 7.18 General 
                8          General Laboratory Precautions                                          57        
                           8.1 Personal Protective Equipment, 8.2 Personal Clothing and             
                           Footwear, 8.3 Protective Gloves, 8.4 Allergy to Natural Rubber Latex 
                           8.5 Hygiene, 8.6 Food and Drink, 8.7 Smoking, 8.8 Experimental 
                           Work, 8.9 Emergencies, 8.10 Out of Hours Working, 8.11 Glassware, 
                           8.12 Syringes, 8.13 Vacuum Systems and Manometers 8.14 
                           Electrical Equipment, 8.15 Photographic Dark Rooms.  *8.16 
                           Cryogenic Gases. 8.17 Use of personal communication & 
                           entertainment devices in labs 
                9          Precautions with Chemicals                                              66 
                           9.1 General Guidance, 9.2 Fume Cupboards, 9.3 Skin Hazards, 9.4 
                           Eye Hazards, 9.5 Pesticides 9.6 Risk of Poisoning - planning for 
                           Emergencies, 9.7 Personal Hygiene, *9.8 Flammable Liquids, 
                           Vapours or Gases, 9.9 Carcinogens, Mutagens and Substances Toxic 
                           to Reproduction,9.10 Nano-materials 9.11 Disposal of Waste 
                           Chemicals, 9.12 Restricted Chemicals, 9.13 Uranium and Thorium  
                           9.14 Respirable crystalline silica[see 6.20] 
                10         Precautions with Biological Materials                                   81 
                           10.1 General, 10.2 Notification Requirements, 10.3 Information and 
                           Guidance, 10.4 Risks Associated with work with Biological Agents, 
                           10.5 Ways to Control Risk, 10.6.1 Genetic Modification, 10.6.2 
                           Biological Sensitising Agents, 10.6.3 Mammals & Higher 
                           Invertebrates, 10.6.4 Lower Vertebrate and Invertebrate Animals, 
                           10.7 Ancillary Equipment, 10.8 Transport of Biological Materials 
                11         Precautions in the Use of Electricity                                   88 
                           11.1 General Precautions, 11.2 Flexible Cables, 11.3 Portable 
                           Appliances, 11.4 Fuses, 11.5 Fire Hazard, 11.6 Radiation Hazards 
                           from Certain High Voltage Electrical Equipment 
                12         Precautions When Working with Non-Ionising Radiation                    92 
                           12.1 Optical Radiation, 12.1.1 Ultra-violet radiation, 12.1.2 Infra-red 
                           radiation, 12.1.3 Lasers; 12.2 Electric and Magnetic Fields,  
                           12.3 Radio Waves, 12.3.2. Mobile Phones, 12.3.3 Microwaves. 
                13         Precautions with Sources of Ionising Radiation                          98 
                14         *Sources of Health and Safety Information                               100 
                15         School/Departmental Safety Officers                                     101 
                *New or modified section 
                 
                This handbook is updated each year to incorporate developments in 
                University policy or new information. It is available on the Safety Office 
                website.  
                 
                A limited number of hard copies are printed at the start of each year, for 
                distribution to Schools and Departments for staff without on-line access. 
                Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                           2 
        Foreword 
         
        The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 makes provision for the health, 
        safety and welfare of all people at work and for the controlled use of 
        dangerous substances and emissions. The Act places a responsibility for 
        care on the whole community and it requires the co-operation of all in 
        creating a healthier and safer working environment. There is a responsibility 
        on all employers to maintain safe plant, systems of work and premises; to 
        arrange adequate instruction, training and supervision; and to lay down a 
        safety policy and to tell their employees about it. Further, all who design, 
        manufacture, install, erect or supply anything for use at work will now be 
        responsible for its safety. Apart from taking care to avoid injury to 
        themselves and others at work employees must co-operate to enable health 
        and safety requirements to be complied with. 
         
        Firstly, everyone must know the risks and potential hazards of the materials 
        and equipment he is working with and so be alert to any dangers. This will 
        ensure that we all adopt safe methods of work to reduce risks to a 
        minimum.  
         
        Secondly, in addition to these special risks, there are those from “non-
        occupational” accidents: the slips, falls, strains and so on which occur at the 
        work- place as much as in the home or on the playing field. We must be 
        conscious of these hazards too as well as the specialised problems in 
        specific work areas.  
         
        Finally, the control of physical conditions is only a partial answer to the 
        accident problem: we have to learn to want to work safely, and to 
        appreciate that a knowledge and awareness of the dangers of materials are 
        not enough. We must be on our guard and  always alert to the simple every 
        day things that can bring injury if they are ignored. 
         
        All of us who work in the University should be aware of the University’s 
        Statement of Safety Policy (reproduced in this Handbook). The 
        arrangements and advice in this Safety Handbook implement that policy and 
        form the basis of safe working and training in safety methods in all Schools 
        and across Professional Services. I hope it will encourage everyone to do 
        the right thing at the right time. 
         
        Dr P Greatrix,  
        Chair, University Safety Committee 
         
        Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                              3 
               Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 
               Statement of the University’s General 
               Policy on Health and Safety at Work 
                
               As a leading research based University, this institution is committed to the 
               achievement of a high quality of provision in all aspects of its activity. The 
               University recognises that health and safety is an integral part of this. 
               Consequently the University will ensure that the health and safety aspects of 
               its activity are given equal consideration with the other aspects of its activity 
               in order that the health and safety of its employees and all other persons 
               who use its premises, including students, visitors and contractors, may be 
               protected. 
                
               Workplace injuries and ill health can be prevented by the application of an 
               effective risk control strategy. The success of this depends upon the full 
               participation of all members of the University in ensuring that the health and 
               safety implications of the work for which they are responsible, at whatever 
               level, has been accounted for. 
                
               The University, through its organisational structure, will seek to ensure that 
               the risks arising out of its activities are identified and that the necessary 
               controls, physical or procedural, are provided, along with the training and 
               supervision needed to support them. The effective functioning of its safety 
               organisation will be audited by the University. The University will participate 
               in consultation, which it recognises as part of the means for achieving a co-
               operative effort at all levels of the organisation in securing effective control 
               over health and safety risks. 
                
               The University Council, as employer, carries the ultimate responsibility for 
               safety in the University. The Registrar has been appointed by Council to be 
               responsible for overseeing the implementation of the University Safety 
               Policy. 
                
               Safety is a line management responsibility and the immediate responsibility 
               for safety within any work area is borne by the appropriate Head of School 
               or Professional Services Department. These individuals are responsible for 
               ensuring that arrangements for safe working within their areas have been 
               set up and published. These local arrangements form part of the University 
               Safety Policy.     
               Dr P Greatrix,  
               Registrar 
                
               Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                       4 
             Section 1: Administrative 
             Organisation of Safety 
              
             1.1      University Arrangements 
             The University Council receives advice on safety policy, which is formulated 
             on its behalf by the University Safety Committee. Once policy has been 
             approved by Council, responsibility for implementing it is delegated to 
             Heads of Schools, Professional Services Departments and Hall Managers, as 
             appropriate, with Council’s duty to monitor implementation performed on its 
             behalf by the Registrar. 
              
             The Director of Health and Safety is the Secretary of the University Safety 
             Committee. He acts as adviser to the University, through the Safety 
             Committee, on matters of safety and also advises directly Schools and  
             Professional Services, Halls of Residence and individual members of staff. 
              
             1.2      Safety Committees 
             The University Safety Committee concerns itself with the safety of all 
             employees and members of the University, staff and students alike, and 
             persons who are not in the University employment and seeks to ensure that 
             they are not exposed to risks to their health and safety while at the 
             university. Special arrangements have been made where there is a joint 
             responsibility, for example, in the Medical School and Teaching Hospital. 
              
             The Statutory Safety Committee has been set up at the request of Trade 
             Union Safety Representatives under the provisions of the Health & Safety at 
             Work Act, 1974 and its relevant Statutory Instruments of 1977. The aim of 
             the Committee, on which appropriate University Officers and all the major 
             Unions are represented, is co-operation and co-ordination of safety matters. 
             Items can be placed on the agenda by both Management and Unions. The 
             Act also provides for recognised Trade Unions to appoint Safety 
             Representatives and all the recognised Unions have set up a network of 
             these Representatives who have statutory functions to fulfil with regard to 
             safety. 
              
             Many sections of the University have set up local safety committees to 
             advise the Head of School or Department on safety and to give an 
             opportunity for regular review of safety performance. They keep the 
             University Safety Committee informed of their proceedings. 
              
             The Statutory Safety Committee reports to management through the 
             University Safety Committee. 
             1.3      Local Management and Organisational Arrangements 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   5 
       The University’s arrangements for managing health and safety are described 
       in detail in “Effective Safety Management”. This is published on the Safety 
       Office website and defines a performance standard for safety management. 
       The Safety Office will audit safety performance against this standard. 
        
       The Head of every work area has the responsibility for ensuring that 
       hazards within the area’s activities have been identified and that 
       arrangements have been made to control the risks arising from them. In 
       addition to the provision and maintenance of equipment and procedures to 
       ensure safety, the arrangements for control should include provision for 
       training, supervision and health surveillance of the people involved where 
       necessary, and the provision of personal protective equipment.  
        
       The Head of each School or Professional Services Department or Hall 
       Manager, should where necessary appoint a School/Departmental Safety 
       Officer to assist him/her in carrying out his/her responsibility within the 
       work area. (Section 4.4 of Effective Safety Management gives general 
       guidance on the role and duties of such an Officer). In some cases Safety 
       Officers have been nominated for particular buildings or portions of 
       University premises. 
        
       Each School, Department, Hall etc. will, where necessary, supplement this 
       Handbook with more specific health and safety information appropriate to its 
       own local circumstances and special problems.  Amongst other things these 
       will explain the local arrangements for managing health and safety and 
       specific procedures or rules covering aspects ranging from the local fire 
       evacuation and first aid arrangements to procedures to be adopted in 
       relation to hazardous materials, equipment, or activities within the work 
       area. These arrangements should be reviewed, and if necessary revised, 
       annually and in the event of any changes that may affect the level of 
       hazards present or the effectiveness of any controls or procedures. In 
       particular the introduction of new processes, equipment, or substances, or 
       the implications arising from building alterations need to be considered. 
       These local arrangements then become, for that location, part of the 
       University Safety Policy. Section 5.2 of Effective Safety Management 
       contains a model Safety Policy. 
        
       New recruits to the University should receive relevant health and safety 
       information on induction. The means for providing this are determined by 
       the School or Department etc and might include the completion of a health 
       and safety induction questionnaire (see Safety Office Guidance). 
        
       Health and safety legislation places obligations on employees as well as the 
       employer. The duties on employees include co-operation with the employer, 
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           6 
             for example by following the relevant safety procedures. Consistent failure 
             to observe the requirements of the University Safety Policy may result in 
             disciplinary action. 
              
             Heads of School/Department and Hall Managers must make appropriate 
             arrangements to monitor the effectiveness of their local arrangements for 
             controlling hazards and preventing unsafe practices. This must involve a 
             system of regular safety audits and inspections as explained in Section 4.7 
             of Effective Safety Management, which also gives guidance on how this 
             should be carried out in practice. The period between inspections will 
             depend very largely on the nature of the hazard and the level of risk 
             involved, but the frequency must be stated and adhered to. 
              
             After carrying out any audit/inspection there should be an evaluation to 
             determine any remedial action necessary, whether in the form of improved 
             facilities, further training of employees or revision of the rules. 
              
             The remedial action taken must be noted and brought to the attention of 
             those working in the appropriate area. 
              
             If necessary remedial action has been identified, but the Head of the work 
             area is unable to carry out major work because of lack of resources, the 
             matter should be referred to the Registrar who will arrange for it to be 
             considered through the University’s committee structure. 
              
             Where University premises are shared with another employer there are 
             reciprocal requirements to liaise and co-operate on health and safety so as 
             to avoid exposing the employees, students and visitors of one organisation 
             to the risks from the others activities. The non-University employer is 
             responsible for controlling the risks to their own staff and visitors from that 
             employer’s activities. It is also obliged to co-operate with the University to 
             enable it to discharge its responsibilities to its own staff, students and 
             visitors. 
              
             1.4     The Role of Individuals 
             Whilst the University as the employer will set the framework of safety 
             management the successful implementations of this by way of controlling 
             workplace risks depends upon the commitment of each member, employee 
             and student of the University to the careful consideration and application of 
             the safety measures related to their work. This contribution is essential at all 
             levels of the organisation from policy formulation and planning of work to 
             the actual execution of the tasks. This philosophy is enshrined in a range of 
             health and safety legislation which places statutory responsibilities on 
             employers and employees alike to ensure that the work is carried out safely, 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 7 
       so that neither they nor anyone else who could be affected by the work is 
       endangered. There is a similar responsibility in respect of other parties such 
       as contractors and visitors to conduct their work so that employees and 
       students of the University are not placed at risk. 
        
       Everyone should make it his or her first task to become familiar with any 
       special instructions issued for dealing with emergencies peculiar to the place 
       in which he or she is working. 
        
       Everyone should get to know the layout of appropriate buildings; emergency 
       and normal exits, location of fire alarms, location of fire fighting appliances 
       and how they work, siting of telephones and first aid arrangements.  
       Remember, it will be too late to find out very much when an emergency 
       actually happens. 
        
       If anyone working at the University has a disability that may have 
       implications relating to the arrangements for safety in the general work 
       situation or in an emergency such as a fire, he or she will appreciate that it 
       is to their advantage to make this known. The same applies to anyone on 
       permanent medication to control a medical condition. If you have any 
       queries on safety matters consult the appropriate safety officer. 
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           8 
       Section 2: Emergencies 
        
       Because of the wide variety of work that is carried out in the University and 
       the complex layout of the various buildings it is not possible to produce a 
       set of valid and detailed emergency instructions to cover any situation which 
       may arise. For this reason emergency procedures appropriate to each area 
       must be established and made known. An essential feature is rapid 
       communication stating the location and nature of the emergency. Telephone 
       Services have established procedures for summoning assistance in the 
       specific locations within the University. These can be accessed via the 
       Telephone Services website. This document is designed to assist the 
       telephone user in a specific location to know which number to call for 
       assistance in the event of an emergency. 
       Many science and engineering Schools will also have their own safety 
       regulations dealing with the more specialised aspects of their work. 
        
       These local arrangements may include circumstances requiring full 
       evacuation, partial evacuation or a preparedness to evacuate. Specific high 
       hazard areas may also be identified and supplemented with local 
       arrangements. Certain individuals with specific responsibilities under the 
       emergency procedures will be identified. It is important to know and 
       understand the contents of the local arrangements and how they may affect 
       your work. Such booklets are meant to be a necessary and useful addition 
       to this general code. There is in every building a notice setting out the 
       procedure to be adopted in case of fire. This instruction should be studied 
       and committed to memory. 
        
       There are certain points that apply to all emergency situations. 
       A   Commit to memory the emergency procedures inside front cover and 
           fire regulations (page 9). You will have no time to read them in an 
           emergency.  
       B   Remember you are expected to act in the spirit of the instructions. 
           There is no substitute for common sense.    
       C   The most important consideration at all times is human safety.   
       D   Remember: if you become a casualty someone must rescue you, 
           possibly at personal risk to themselves. So avoid becoming a 
           casualty. 
       E   Act quietly and methodically. Do not rush or attempt to pass others 
           when leaving the scene of an accident.   
       F   The senior person present should assume control of the situation 
           ensuring safe evacuation from the area of all persons present and be 
           prepared to warn the Emergency Services of known special hazards. 
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           9 
               Section 3: Fire Precautions 
                
               It is a responsibility on all members of the University to know the position of 
               fire alarm, extinguishers and all exits of the buildings in which they are 
               working or using. 
                
               It is essential that all members of the University know the positions of their 
               nearest fire alarm call points, internal and external telephones, 
               extinguishers and all the exits from the building in which they are working 
               or using. Similarly the sound(s) of the fire alarm system should be known 
               and their meaning understood. These features should be made known to all 
               members of the University who will be new to working in or using the 
               building. 
                
               All exit routes must be capable of providing safe and unimpeded passage in 
               the event of an emergency. Consequently corridors and staircases should 
               not be used as working or storage areas. All doors affording exit should be 
               capable of being easily and immediately opened from within at all times that 
               the building is occupied. Fire resisting smoke stop doors must not be left 
               open e.g. held by wedges or extinguishers. 
                
               IN CASE OF FIRE 
               On discovering a Fire 
                       (a)   Raise the alarm by operating the nearest break glass call point. 
                       (b)   Dial 8888 on the nearest internal telephone stating the location 
                             of the fire. (Medical School & embedded units at QMC/City 
                             Hospital, dial 2222) 
                       (c)   Attack the fire with nearest appropriate extinguisher if safe to 
                             do so and your escape route is clear.  
               On hearing the Alarm 
                       (a)   Leave the building immediately do not use lift do not stop to 
                             collect personal belongings. 
                       (b)   Close all doors and windows when leaving.   
                       (c)   Report to your assembly point.   
               Porters and Security Staff 
                       (a)   Assist orderly evacuation of building.   
                       (b)   Prevent persons re-entering building during emergency. 
                
               Fire Precautions in the Medical School 
               Follow local fire procedure.  
                
               Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                         10 
              3.1      Use of Extinguishers 
              The prompt and intelligent use of an extinguisher in the earliest stages can 
              prevent a serious fire. Training in the use of fire extinguishers can be 
              arranged through the Safety Office. 
               
              In attempting to put out a fire it is essential that the correct type of 
              extinguisher is used. The use of the wrong type could in some 
              circumstances increase the hazard and danger to the operator. 
               
              Under no circumstances should a water extinguisher be used on electrical 
              fires. 
               
              Materials Involved                      Extinguisher to Use (and colour 
                                                      of extinguisher or of markings 
                                                      on a red body) 
              All carbonaceous materials such as      Water type (red) 
              wood, textiles, paper, etc. 
              Flammable liquids, solvents, petrol,    Foam (cream); Fire blanket; 
              oil, etc.                               Dry Powder (blue); Carbon Dioxide 
                                                      (black); 
              Live electrical equipment and wiring    Dry powder or Carbon Dioxide 
               
              Fire extinguishers must not be used to hold open doors as they may be 
              damaged as a result and will not be available at their expected location in 
              the event of a fire. The holding open of fire doors, other than by automatic 
              door release devices, is not permitted as this reduces the fire protection of 
              the building by allowing smoke and flames to spread further and more 
              quickly. 
               
              3.2      Reporting of Fire 
              A Fire Report Form must be completed immediately in respect of all 
              outbreaks of fire occurring within the University. This is to ensure that basic 
              information on the fire is available to the University in the event of any 
              future enquiry and to enable the incident to be investigated with a view to 
              the possibility of preventing further similar incidents. 
               
              The Fire Report Form should be completed by Heads of School/Department 
              etc or Hall Managers or their respective nominated personnel. Blank copies 
              of the form for photocopying as required have been distributed for local use. 
              In the event of difficulty further copies can be obtained from the Safety 
              Office. When completed, one copy of the form should be sent to the Safety 
              Office, one to the Security Office and one retained within the location. 
               
              Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                     11 
             3.3     Fire Evacuation Procedure 
             Each School, Department etc is responsible for setting up fire evacuation 
             procedures. The aim is that in the event of fire all persons in the location 
             should leave immediately, and that by the time the Fire Service arrives, 
             information is available on whether there are any persons remaining in the 
             building. This is normally achieved by dividing the building into sections and 
             personnel should on hearing the fire alarm clear each of these sections as 
             they leave. They should then report to a co-ordinating member of staff who 
             on completion of the evacuation should be in a position to advise the 
             attending officer from the Fire Brigade of the position concerning the 
             successful clearance of the building. 
              
             To assist in the management and control of this system, the majority of 
             buildings have their sections identified by strategically placed fire tokens. A 
             token should be taken by the first member of staff passing it on evacuating 
             the section and who should then check that the rooms within that section 
             have been cleared. This person then reports to the co-ordinator at the 
             assembly point. 
              
             The co-ordinator will be one of a number of senior members of School or 
             Department etc staff nominated to take charge in the event of an 
             emergency. In the case of buildings used by several Schools or 
             Departments there will be a co-ordinated system for the building as a 
             whole. 
              
             At least one exercise of the fire evacuation procedure (fire drill) will be held 
             annually. The assistance of the University Fire Safety Adviser (Extension 
             13302) must be sought prior to the exercise taking place. This will enable 
             the necessary personnel, i.e. duty electrician etc. to be present. The 
             exercise must be followed by a review of the procedures, as appropriate, in 
             the light of how effective the fire drill proved to be. A report must then be 
             forwarded to the Fire Safety Adviser at the University Safety Office. 
              
             The fire alarm system must be tested each week. (The duty electrician may 
             undertake this task if a request is made to the Estate Office). 
              
             Outbreaks of fire, fire drills and the testing of fire alarms must be recorded. 
              
             3.4     Fire Response Procedure 
             This procedure (see Safety Office Guidance) deals with the response by 
             University Security to fire alarm signals received in Trent Control. All 
             buildings at University Park, Sutton Bonington, Jubilee, Clinical Sciences 
             Building at City Hospital and Shakespeare Street have fire alarm systems 
             that send a signal to Trent Security Control Room.  
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 12 
             At Jubilee Campus, Sutton Bonington and Shakespeare Street a five-minute 
             delay in calling the Fire Brigade is permitted only during certain working 
             hours in order that the reason for the automatic fire alarm activation can be 
             investigated. The procedure defines the hours during which the delay 
             applies; this varies for different categories of building, e.g. academic, 
             residential.  
              
             The Fire Brigade will not attend to fire alarm actuations at University Park 
             unless they have verbal confirmation that there is an actual Fire/Incident. 
              
             At sites shared with hospitals (e.g. Medical School and City Hospital) the 
             hospital’s response arrangements are to be adopted. 
              
             If a definite report of fire is received by Trent Control, they will contact the 
             Fire Brigade immediately. 
              
             3.5      Hazard Information for the Fire Brigade 
             Some activities might expose fire officers attending a fire to greater hazard 
             than would normally be the case for that type of building. Consequently sets 
             of floor plans showing high hazard areas are kept available for the Fire 
             Brigade at each relevant building, mainly laboratory or workshop buildings.  
              
             Hazard plans show the location of facilities such as radiation or biohazard 
             laboratories, chemical stores or permanent/semi-permanent gas cylinders, 
             high power lasers. Isolators for main services are also included. Hard copies 
             are kept in an accessible location in each building and can also be accessed 
             via the Building Information System. 
              
             Schools are required to notify the Estate Office of any changes to the hazard 
             locations in order that the plans can be updated and re-issued.  
              
             3.6      Emergency Evacuation of Persons with Disabilities 
             The University will seek to comply with the guidance in British Standards, 
             Codes of Practice and the Building Regulations. Reasonable adjustments will 
             be made wherever possible to facilitate safe access and egress.  
              
             The University's arrangements for the emergency evacuation of persons 
             with a disability are published on the Safety Office website. This includes 
             general information about the facilities available and the procedures in 
             place. Information describing the general emergency and evacuation 
             arrangements is contained in building access plans displayed near the 
             principal entrances to buildings and is also available on the Estate Office 
             website.  
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   13 
                   If these general arrangements do not seem suitable then it might be 
                   necessary to develop a Personal Emergency Evacuation Plan (PEEP). The 
                   purpose of this is to identify with the person concerned any additional 
                   arrangements that may reasonably be made to enable their effective 
                   evacuation in an emergency. This will reflect the unique characteristics of 
                   the buildings that they need to visit and their own requirements. 
                    
                   To initiate the development of a PEEP the University must be notified as 
                   follows: 
                              Students should notify Academic Support, 
                              Members of staff should notify their line manager, 
                              In the case of university accommodation by indicating on the 
                               Residence Form issued prior to arrival or subsequently the Hall 
                               Manager should be notified.  
                    
                   The following specific information is provided for wheelchair users 
                   concerning emergency evacuation arrangements: 
                    
                   All buildings are provided with a fire alarm system that is activated 
                   automatically when a fire is detected but can also be manually activated by 
                   operating a fire alarm call point. The sound of the alarm is usually a siren.  
                   Lifts must not be used in the event of a fire unless specifically designated 
                   for this purpose.  
                    
                   If the alarm sounds you should leave the building using the nearest suitable 
                   exit to the outside. If you are on a floor from which you cannot exit without 
                   using a lift you should make your way to the nearest refuge. A refuge is a 
                   temporary safe space for you to await assistance for your evacuation. It 
                   comprises a fire resisting enclosure that is served directly by a safe route to 
                   a storey exit, evacuation lift or final exit. The location of refuges is shown on 
                   the building access plans located inside the main entrance of the building 
                   and also accessible on the Web. 
                    
                   Once in the refuge you should contact Security Control using the telephone 
                   in the refuge where provided or a mobile phone (telephone 0115 951 8888) 
                   to indicate your presence in a refuge. You will be asked for your name, the 
                   location of the refuge, and if relevant your mobile telephone number so that 
                   the Security Office can keep in contact with you to provide you with 
                   information about the alarm and your evacuation. The overwhelming 
                   majority of fire alarm activations are due to reasons other than a fire so you 
                   should not worry and remain calm. 
                    
                   A member of the response team should contact you within a few minutes. 
                   You will not be evacuated unless it is necessary to do this. If it necessary to 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      14 
        evacuate you and there is not a suitable lift then you might be asked to 
        transfer to an Evacuation Chair. This is a specially designed chair for 
        descending staircases. You are encouraged to try one of these at an early 
        point of your time at the University. If you have any reservations about the 
        use or suitability of an Evacuation Chair you should make this known so that 
        your requirements can be reviewed and alternative arrangements made.  
         
         
         
         
         
        Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                              15 
             Section 4: Emergency First Aid 
             Treatment 
              
             4.1      General Arrangements 
             The arrangements for first aid provision across the University are described 
             in the University Code of Practice. This includes the selection and training of 
             first-aiders, the contents of first aid boxes and the arrangements for 
             obtaining first aid supplies.  
              
             Identifying appropriate provision of first aid is the responsibility of each 
             School/Department – hazard profile, location and patterns of working are 
             amongst the relevant factors to be taken into account. Lists of first-aiders 
             for the School/Department etc or building, their location and internal phone 
             number will be strategically located throughout the work area or next to first 
             aid boxes. They will also be contained within the local safety policy.  
              
             4.2      First Aid Boxes 
             There are many first-aid boxes located at vantage points in the University’s 
             buildings. Anyone working regularly in one place should note the position of 
             the nearest box and the name of the First Aider responsible for it. 
             Information on typical first aid contents is provided in the Code of Practice. 
              
             4.3      First Aid Training 
             Courses in first aid instruction for members of the University are arranged 
             throughout the year by Professional Development. Two types of course are 
             available. A one-day Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW), or a three-day 
             First Aid at Work (FAW) course. The choice of course depends on the risks 
             within the area and the types of situation/injury likely to arise. Generally, 
             the EFAW course is appropriate for those in lower risk teaching and office 
             environments, whilst the FAW course is more applicable for higher risk 
             laboratory and workshop environments, and fieldwork or remote working. 
                     EFAW training enables a first-aider to give emergency first aid to 
                      someone who is injured or becomes ill while at work.  
                     FAW training includes EFAW and also equips the first-aider to apply 
                      first aid to a range of specific injuries and illness. 
             Both require a refresher course after three years and optional annual 
             refresher courses are available. 
              
             To be considered for training, staff should discuss with their local safety 
             officer who has the overview on provision within the unit. 
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   16 
             Specific training for administering first aid in the event of cyanide or 
             hydrofluoric acid exposure is also available. 
              
             4.4     First Aid Treatment of Casualties 
             Serious Injury 
             The first object of treatment is to prevent deterioration in the injured 
             person’s condition until medical assistance arrives. The patient should be 
             moved as little as possible to prevent further injury. 
             1.      Ensure a clear airway to enable the casualty to breathe. Should 
                     pulse/breathing have ceased send for help (8888). 
             2.      Monitor the casualty’s pulse/breathing and commence resuscitation 
                     if able. Control bleeding by applying direct pressure on or near any 
                     wound. 
             3.      Irrigate off most toxic or corrosive substances. 
              
             Do not give injured or unconscious casualties anything to drink eat 
             or smoke. 
              
             Eye Injuries 
             Injury from solid objects requires medical attention. Splashes of any liquid 
             in the eye must be regarded as potentially harmful. Irrigation of the eye 
             with copious water should be commenced immediately and continued for 10 
             minutes. 
             All eye injuries should be referred to the Eye Casualty Department at the 
             Queen’s Medical Centre. 
              
             Poisoning 
             This is a medical emergency and urgent help should be summoned. 
             If the casualty is unconscious, place in the recovery position. Should the 
             breathing or pulse cease commence resuscitation. 
              
             Burns and Scalds 
             Irrigate the burnt area with cold water for at least ten minutes and then 
             apply a loose, non- fluffy sterile dressing. Any blistering of the skin should 
             not be punctured. 
              
             Cryogenic Burns 
             Apply copious amounts of tepid water to the affected area of skin to reduce 
             freezing in the tissue, loosen any clothing that may restrict blood circulation 
             and move the injured person to a warm place but not a hot environment. Do 
             not apply heat to any affected parts. To protect frozen areas apply a loose, 
             non-fluffy sterile dressing. Seek medical attention. 
              
             Head Injury 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 17 
       All head injuries must be seen by a qualified first aider and medical advice 
       sought if the injury has involved even momentary loss of consciousness. 
        
       Lacerations 
       Wash thoroughly with water and apply a sterile dressing. If the wound was 
       caused by a dirty object, it is advisable to seek medical advice regarding 
       protection against infection, especially tetanus. 
        
       Dirty/Used Sharps Injuries, Body Fluid splash to Eyes/mouth 
       The following steps should be taken after a Used/Dirty Sharps injury, e.g. 
       contaminated syringe needle, scalpel blade etc, or a human bite or scratch 
       or splash of body fluid into the eyes or mouth. Unused/clean sharps do not 
       present a risk. 
        
       Encourage wound to bleed and do not suck. Wash with soap and water, dry 
       and apply a waterproof dressing. Use copious amounts of water to wash 
       away a body fluid splash to the eyes or mouth. Notify the incident to your 
       line manager, academic supervisor or other appropriate senior staff in the 
       area. Complete an accident report form.  
        
       The infection risk will need to be assessed. If the injury is caused by a used 
       or dirty sharp, human bite or scratch, human body fluid splash of known 
       /unknown source the following procedure must be followed: 
       Immediately attend Accident & Emergency department at Nottingham 
       University Hospital Queen Medical Centre:  
       0115-9249924 
       Additionally during normal hours contact Occupational Health  
       Mon-Thursday 0830 -1630   Friday 0900 – 1630 
       Tel:  0115 951 4329  
       Outside normal hours contact: 
       Contact OH at first available time above. 
       OH MUST be provided with an incident risk assessment 
       After A and E intervention the injured person should attend OH as 
       soon as possible for potential HEP B vaccination and blood storage 
       services 
        
       The full procedure for sharps injury can be found through the Safety Office 
       Policies and Guidance website. 
        
        
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           18 
             Injuries Involved Radioactivity 
             These should be dealt with in the manner laid down in the local rules on 
             Radiation Safety. 
              
             Electric Shock 
             If the Casualty is Unconscious 
             Switch off current and use an insulating material to pull the victim away 
             from the conductor. 
              
             If the breathing and the pulse cease send for help and commence 
             resuscitation. 
              
             If the Casualty is Conscious 
             Treat as for “shock” below. 
              
             “Shock” 
             This is a state of collapse, which may result from physical or emotional 
             injury and symptoms range from faintness to complete collapse and 
             unconsciousness. 
              
             The patient should be laid down and, if possible, the feet raised higher than 
             the head. A shocked person needs reassurance and should not be moved 
             unnecessarily. Keep a shocked case warm with a blanket. Severe shock is a 
             medical emergency and an ambulance should be sent for - dial 8888. 
              
             4.5     AEDs (Defibrillators) 
             The University has a number of portable automated external defibrillators 
             (AEDs) on its main campuses, both on security vehicles and in fixed 
             locations. The equipment is intended for use by any person  in emergency 
             situations when a casualty has a serious cardiac rhythm disturbance causing 
             unconsciousness, such as heart attack. AEDs are not effective for all cardiac 
             emergencies but they are of benefit in a small proportion of acute 
             emergencies. The quicker life saving first aid and an AED are used on a 
             casualty, the better the outlook for survival. The University has response 
             procedures in place to ensure that the AED and a trained operator reach the 
             casualty promptly. 
              
             All staff have the opportunity to attend training/familiarisation sessions, 
             these are publicised through the Safety Office website. 
               
             Detailed information on the arrangements including training and the 
             emergency response procedure is available. 
              
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 19 
         The locations of the AEDs are as follows.  
         Further information on contact details and building access is available on the 
         Safety Office Workspace. 
          
          UNIVERSITY PARK  
         Chemistry foyer 
         Coates Bldg, Telford Exchange, Bldg Attendant’s station 
         East Midlands Conf. Centre behind reception 
         Hallward Library, opposite Front Desk 
         Lakeside Arts Centre, Box Office  
         Law & Social Sciences Bldg, B19 
         Maths entrance foyer 
         Physics Bldg, B218 
         Psychology entrance foyer 
         Sports Centre main reception area 
         Trent Building, Trent Security 
         Mobile Security Vehicles 
         JUBILEE CAMPUS 
         Jubilee Sports Centre, reception area 
         Djanogly Learning Resources Centre - entrance 
         KINGS MEADOW 
         Main Reception area 
         Rear staff entrance – corridor to left 
         SUTTON BONINGTON 
         Main Building adjacent to Enquiry Office 
         Plant Sciences Foyer 
         SVMS (Vet School) Building Foyer 
         Sports Centre Reception 
         MEDICAL SCHOOL, QMC 
         A floor foyer, near Security office 
         Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                  20 
             Section 5: Reporting of 
             Accidents 
              
             5.1     Health & Safety Executive Requirements 
             In the case of a major incident occurring, the Health and Safety Executive 
             may choose to visit the scene as soon as possible, before anything 
             significant has been disturbed.  The Reporting of Injuries, Diseases & 
             Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 1995 therefore require that for major 
             incidents information must be transmitted as soon as possible to the local 
             office of the Health and Safety Executive. The University’s procedure for this 
             is outlined in Safety Office Guidance. 
              
             The policy describes the situations requiring a report to the Health & Safety 
             Executive and the University arrangements for doing so. The essential 
             requirement is that the Safety Office must be notified as soon as possible on 
             ext. 13401/mailto:bb-safety-office@exmail.nottingham.ac.uk, in case of 
             extremely serious incidents. Notification to the Health & Safety Executive of 
             such incidents will be made by the Safety Office. If there is uncertainty 
             about whether an incident is notifiable to HSE, Schools/Departments are 
             expected to inform the Safety Office who will advise on application of the 
             Regulations. 
              
             The types of  incident which require notification to the HSE are: 
                    Major Injuries to staff, includes 
                          o   most fractures 
                          o   major dislocations 
                          o   some eye injuries 
                          o   serious injuries from electrical incidents 
                          o   some types of loss of consciousness 
                          o   acute illness arising from exposure to harmful substances 
                          o   injuries resulting from work-related assault 
                          o   any injury which results in the person being detained in 
                              hospital over 24 hours 
                    More than 7 days lost time incidents to staff 
                    Certain dangerous Occurrences (these do not necessarily have 
                      to have involved injury of persons) 
                          o   uncontrolled release or escape of a potentially hazardous 
                              material 
                          o   collapse, overturning or failure of load-bearing parts of 
                              lifts and lifting equipment.  
                          o   explosion, collapse or bursting of any closed vessel or 
                              associated pipework  
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 21 
                              o   plant or equipment coming into contact with overhead 
                                   power lines  
                              o   electrical short circuit or overload causing fire or 
                                   explosion  
                       Certain occupationally-acquired diseases 
                              o   certain poisonings  
                              o   some skin diseases such as occupational dermatitis, 
                                   skin cancer, chrome ulcer, oil folliculitis/acne  
                              o   lung disease including : occupational asthma, farmer's 
                                   lung, pneumoconiosis, asbestosis, mesothelioma  
                              o   infections such as leptospirosis, hepatitis, tuberculosis, 
                                   anthrax, legionellosis and tetanus  
                              o   other conditions such as: occupational cancer, certain 
                                   musculoskeletal disorders, decompression illness and 
                                   hand-arm vibration syndrome 
                       Member of the public/visitor taken from the scene of an 
                         incident straight to hospital for treatment - students are classed as 
                         members of the public under these Regulations.  
                
                
                
               5.2      University Requirements 
               University guidance describes the internal accident reporting system. For 
               ALL incidents (injuries, near misses/dangerous occurrences and occupational 
               health cases), including those mentioned above, an Incident Report must be 
               completed. This includes accidents to ANY person, including students and 
               visitors, in ANY part of the campus, including conference facilities, Halls of 
               Residence and sports facilities. This is to ensure that basic information of 
               the incident is available to the University in the event of any future enquiry 
               and to enable the incident to be followed up with a view to the possibility of 
               preventing further similar incidents. 
                
               Reporting of work-related injuries, diseases and dangerous 
               occurrences/near misses is done via the on-line incident reporting 
               system, which replaces the previous paper-based system. 
               The paper form is still available in most School/Departments for use at 
               a local level, the details are then transferred by the School/Department 
               to the on-line system.  
                
               The on-line incident report form consists of a report section enabling rapid 
               notification of the incident to the relevant staff and the Safety Office and 
               may be completed by anyone who has sufficient information, e.g. the 
               injured person, supervisor, first aider etc. In addition there is an 
               Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                        22 
       investigation section enabling further information to be provided once the 
       full details are known, this is completed by the local manager and/or safety 
       officer. A comments/actions section is also available. 
        
       In the case of any fire occurring at the University, a Fire Report must be 
       completed. (See page 11). 
         
         
        
        
        
        
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           23 
             Section 6: General Precautions 
              
             6.1     Risk management 
             The most important way of ensuring good health and safety is through an 
             effective risk management strategy. Individuals must be aware of the 
             hazards (i.e. things that can cause harm) involved in their work whether it 
             be a simple task of lifting or a complex experimental procedure. The 
             primary aim should be to prevent  harm occurring, however it is recognised 
             that this may not always be possible, in which case control measures should 
             be identified that will as far as reasonably practicable reduce the risk of 
             harm occurring to an acceptable level. 
              
             Control measures should be considered and applied in the following order: 
                    Prevention – the work/use of the substance must be fully justified 
                     and necessary. 
                    Substitution – can a less harmful substance/material or more 
                     suitable equipment be used? 
                    Enclosure/engineering controls – separate the individual from the 
                     hazard. e.g. by using a fume cupboard or provision of machine 
                     guards. 
                    Defining procedural handling controls e.g. using a trolley to assist 
                     in moving a piece of equipment, avoiding use of sharps, controlling 
                     the temperature of a reaction. 
                    Personal Protective Equipment [PPE] – identify what is required in 
                     addition to the above controls to minimise risk (e.g. safety 
                     specs, footwear, lab coats, gloves). Where PPE is deemed 
                     necessary it must be worn. Students failing to comply may be 
                     excluded from particular practical classes or areas. 
             Risk assessment (as required by the Management of Health and Safety at 
             Work Regulations) should be the first step in deciding the control measures 
             needed. For more complex procedures/operations the control measures 
             identified to minimise risk should be incorporated into a written standard 
             operating procedures approved and checked by supervisor /manager.  
              
             Advice on specific safety aspects of a procedure should be sought from the 
             local Safety Officer or the University Safety Office. Information is also 
             available on-line from the following sources: 
             Safety Office Guides & Publications  
             Health & Safety Executive website 
              
              
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 24 
             Training and supervision 
             One of the most important elements of controlling the risks and making sure 
             that the controls are properly used is the provision of information, 
             instruction and training to those doing the work. This also needs 
             supplementing with supervision to make sure that the information etc. has 
             been properly understood and that the task is being competently carried 
             out. The extent of direct supervision can be relaxed as the person 
             demonstrates competence but adherence to correct procedures must form 
             part of the ongoing monitoring arrangements. The responsibilities of 
             academic supervisors toward post graduate and undergraduate students are 
             described in Safety Office Guidance. 
              
             Monitoring 
             It is essential that individuals remain vigilant toward the general conditions 
             in an area and/or of any equipment or materials used in their work. Any 
             defects must be reported immediately to their line manager or supervisor 
             and if necessary the item taken out of use until repaired. 
              
             6.2     University Codes of Practice, Policies and Guidance 
             The Safety Office has produced topic-specific guidance  where there is a 
             particular hazard likely to occur in different Schools/Departments etc. Such 
             guidance is produced with the intention of achieving uniform standards of 
             safe practice. This handbook refers to specific University codes of practice, 
             policy or guidance where it exists and the entire listing is given on the 
             Safety Office website. 
              
             6.3     Occupational Health 
             The primary function of the occupational health service is to advise on 
             matters relating to health and the working environment. This is carried out 
             in close co-operation with the Safety Office. 
              
             Where the work could involve exposure to hazardous substances or agents 
             medical screening might be required before the work is undertaken and 
             periodically thereafter. Examples include; allergy screening for those 
             working with animals) and farm workers; checks for prospective users of 
             ionising radiations, lasers and certain hazardous chemicals (e.g. respiratory 
             sensitisers); and exposure to noise or vibrating equipment. It is the Line 
             Manager’s responsibility to arrange for health surveillance  with  
             Occupational Health. Further advice is available from the Occupational 
             Health Unit or the Safety Office.  
              
             6.4     Slips and Trips 
             A common type of incident in the working environment is falls, caused by 
             slipping or tripping on a level, on stairs/steps, from access equipment (e.g. 
             ladders) or from roofs. 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 25 
                   Some of the important factors in maintaining a low risk of people falling 
                   include: 
                              Appropriate floor surface for the activity taking place 
                              Maintenance of floor surfaces (dealing with defects such as cracked 
                               flagstones, lifting carpet tiles) 
                              Suitable cleaning regimes that effectively deal with the likely 
                               contamination (weather, spillages, leaks, sand, dust, etc.) 
                              Maintaining clear and unobstructed walkways 
                              Effective positioning of matting inside entrances 
                              Non-slip footwear in certain environments (kitchens) 
                              Training in relation to access equipment and use of roof-work 
                               permits 
                    
                   It should also be noted that where spillages or leaks occur, it is crucial, if 
                   the slip risk is to be substantially reduced, to either keep people off the wet 
                   surface or to clean and dry the surface as soon as possible. Wet mopping 
                   that leaves the surface damp does not actually decrease the slip risk 
                   (findings of both HSE and University slip tests). 
                    
                   The Safety Office is able to assess floor surfaces to give an indication of the 
                   slipperiness using the HSE’s Slip Assessment Tool. This takes into 
                   consideration the type of floor, the cleaning regime, the footfall and the 
                   likely contaminants (weather, chemicals, dusts, etc.)  
                    
                   In all situations, the risks of tripping or slipping in the workplace should be 
                   considered and where identified as a significant risk, should be incorporated 
                   into local risk assessments with the aim of formulating an action plan to 
                   reduce the risk. 
                    
                   Corridors and staircases must provide safe circulation and emergency 
                   escape routes and hence they must not be used as working or storage 
                   areas. Never run on polished floors of corridors or common rooms. Bicycles 
                   must not be brought into University buildings as they can cause serious 
                   obstruction either within work areas or along routes comprising a means of 
                   escape from the building (see University Statement) 
                    
                   6.5         Office Safety 
                   In offices, falls are a common source of accidents. Therefore, it is necessary 
                   to keep floors clear and free of goods, litter, trailing cables, etc. Also proper 
                   provision must be made for access to high level storage, e.g. by means of 
                   step stools and NOT by standing on chairs. Increasingly office equipment 
                   such as printing and duplicating machines, guillotines etc. are being 
                   introduced and these can cause serious injury if used carelessly. Chemical, 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      26 
             electrical and mechanical hazards may be involved and the appropriate 
             sections of this Handbook should be consulted. 
              
             6.6     Display Screen Equipment 
             The use of display screen equipment is subject to the Health & Safety 
             (Display Screen Equipment) Regulations and the University’s Policy for 
             implementing these is outlined in Safety Office Guidance. The Regulations 
             apply to workstations used by people for a significant part of most days; i.e. 
             a user as legally defined. In general terms someone whose workstation use 
             averages 2 hours per day over the course of a week would be a “user”, 
             even if the actual use is for short periods at each time. Where the nature of 
             the work requires prolonged and intensive sessions, then this threshold is 
             lowered such that a single 1 hour intensive session each day is also likely to 
             lead to an individual being defined as a user. Where the amount of use falls 
             between these two types of use, then each case needs to be considered on 
             its merits. 
              
             Local arrangements should ensure that the workstations of DSE users are 
             assessed in order that the design and layout will minimise the risk of 
             problems from aching backs, shoulders and wrists, or visual fatigue. In the 
             first instance all users should complete the self-assessment workstation 
             checklist (see guidance) and then forward it to the local DSE 
             assessor/coordinator for review and action. Users should also be provided 
             with training in the safe use of the display screen equipment. Computer-
             based training is available as are courses run by the Safety Office. A 
             summary of DSE information for users is available on the Safety Office 
             website. 
              
             Display screen equipment users may request an eye and eyesight test if 
             they are concerned about any potential visual problems arising from the 
             work. The mechanism for arranging this is described in Safety Office 
             Guidance. The University operates an eye-test voucher scheme for DSE 
             Users i.e. those who operate display screen equipment "as a significant 
             part of their normal work", which usually interpreted as continuous 
             intensive use for more than about an hour on most days of the week. 
             Contact you manager or local safety officer for details. This scheme 
             includes special corrective appliances, e.g. basic spectacles, where these 
             are required to enable the person to work with display screen equipment.  
              
             The Safety Office provides training for DSE assessors, courses may be 
             booked via the Safety Office website. 
              
             Monitors should be switched off at the end of the day to reduce the risk of 
             fire and save energy.  
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 27 
              
             6.7     Manual Handling Operations 
             Manual handling operations, i.e. tasks involving lifting, moving and 
             supporting of loads by way of physical effort, are subject to the Manual 
             Handling Operations 1992. Guidance on implementing these is contained in 
             University Guidance. 
              
             Manual handling operations should be avoided if it is reasonably practicable 
             to do so, for example by eliminating the task, by redesigning the operation, 
             or by way of automation or mechanisation. A large number of tasks cannot 
             be eliminated however, in which case the operation should be assessed in 
             order that those aspects of the task which could give rise to injury are 
             identified and precautions taken to minimise the risks, so far as is 
             reasonably practicable. The precautions may involve alterations to the task 
             layout or design; alterations to the load, such as making it lighter or 
             providing handles; or the provision and use of mechanical aids such as 
             trolleys or lifting appliances. 
              
             Employees whose duties involve manual handling should be provided with 
             training in safe handling.  They should attend the Moving & Handling Course 
             which is available centrally through the Safety Office and they should be 
             provided with specific training at a local level, relating to the actual handling 
             activities they will be doing. 
              
             Where handling equipment or procedures have been provided by Schools or 
             Departments etc, then staff should ensure that these are used. Where 
             communal equipment has been used, it is important that it is returned to its 
             designated storage location to assist in its subsequent use. 
              
             6.8     Psychological Wellbeing and the Avoidance and 
                     Management of Stress 
             Stress is an adverse reaction displayed by a person to excessive pressures 
             and demands placed upon them. Stress will reduce a person's ability to 
             function effectively and if prolonged may damage their psychological 
             wellbeing. Psychological wellbeing is as important to an individual as good 
             physical health and can affect their efficiency and effectiveness whilst at 
             work. This is recognised by the University and a policy for psychological 
             wellbeing and the avoidance and management of stress is in place. Please 
             refer to Section 3 of the University Staff Handbook (available from the 
             Human Resources Department Website). The policy outlines steps for the 
             management of stress, information on factors that are known to increase 
             stress and the recognised signs and symptoms of stress. 
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 28 
             6.9     New and Expectant Mothers 
             Information will be provided to female workers of childbearing age in 
             relation to work activities and processes that could adversely affect them or 
             their unborn child. The risks may be physical (e.g. manual handling, 
             ionising radiation), biological (e.g. contact with blood and body fluids, 
             micro-organisms, zoonoses) or chemical (e.g. carcinogenic substances).  
              
             Where the nature of the work area or work activities may present a risk to a 
             new or expectant mother it is the responsibility of that person to notify local 
             management at the earliest opportunity to enable the work to be specifically 
             assessed. Where significant risks are identified appropriate action will be 
             taken. The Head of School may require written confirmation of pregnancy 
             from her medical adviser. Similar arrangements also apply to those who 
             return to work and are breastfeeding where aspects of the work could 
             adversely affect them or the infant. 
              
             In all circumstances, it is the responsibility of the individual to notify Human 
             Resources of pregnancy in accordance with the University's Maternity Leave 
             Regulations, i.e. receipt of a 'Mat B' Certificate 13 weeks before the 
             expected date of confinement. 
              
             There may be other issues to be considered that might affect the expectant 
             mother at work, including nightworking and rest at work. Further 
             information is contained in Safety Office Guidance on new and expectant 
             mothers at work.  
              
             6.10    University of Nottingham - No Smoking Policy  
             The University has a No Smoking Policy which is a corporate policy of the 
             University and is not subject to reinterpretation by local management. The 
             full policy is available via the Safety Office website. 
              
             The following key points should be noted: 
              
             1. Prohibition of Smoking within University Buildings etc. 
                i.   Smoking is prohibited throughout all University buildings, subject to 
                     points 1(iii) and 1(iv) below.  
               
                ii.  The prohibition on smoking inside buildings inherently includes all 
                     general circulation areas such as corridors, stairs, lifts, foyers, 
                     reception and toilet areas; bars and eating areas; libraries; meeting 
                     rooms; and offices including those which are single occupancy.  
               
               iii.  Within the Halls of Residence, each Hall Council will determine the 
                     local policy relating to smoking in study bedrooms, which are 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 29 
                              deemed to be private areas. Smoking is otherwise prohibited inside 
                              the Hall of Residence, including in all common areas and all 
                              communal rooms, bars, lounges, eating facilities and circulation 
                              areas.  
                    
                     iv.      Smoking will be permitted in private areas of University houses 
                              used as the primary residence of members of staff, for example 
                              staff houses and Wardens' Houses.  
                    
                      v.      Smoking is prohibited in University-owned vehicles, vehicles leased 
                              to, or on hire to, the University, and in any other case whilst 
                              travelling with others on University business. Vehicles provided 
                              under the University Car Leasing Scheme are considered to be 
                              equivalent to a privately owned vehicle for the purpose of this 
                              policy. 
                               
                   
                  2. Smoking Areas Outside Buildings. 
                       i.     Unless specifically prohibited by the policy of a host organisation on 
                              whose site the University operates smoking is permitted outdoors 
                              in open areas away from entrances, windows and other openings 
                              into University buildings.  
                               
                              {Please note that staff and students wishing to smoke are 
                              requested to do this away from doors, windows and access routes 
                              into the buildings. This is to prevent smoke entering the building 
                              through windows; to avoid the accumulation of litter at entrances; 
                              and to enable people to enter and leave the building without 
                              passing through an area used for smoking. A distance of 10m from 
                              windows is normally enough to ensure that smoke is effectively 
                              dissipated. To assist in this the Estate Office reviews the location of 
                              litterbins to facilitate smoking away from these areas} 
                    
                      ii.     To avoid the accumulation of unsightly smoking litter, facilities such 
                              as small bins at suitable locations away from building openings will 
                              be provided. Where small bins for extinguishing cigarettes are 
                              provided on the approach to building entrances these are only to 
                              enable safe and responsible extinguishing of cigarettes before 
                              entering the building and do not indicate that smoking is permitted 
                              at that location.  
                    
                  3. Implementation. 
                       i.     Every encouragement will be given to smokers who wish to give up 
                              the habit of smoking. Support in stopping smoking is available 
                  Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      30 
                                       through New Leaf, the free NHS free stop-smoking service, which 
                                       can be accessed directly or by referral through GPs. Further 
                                       information can be obtained from Occupational Health or via the 
                                       New Leaf website. 
                         
                            ii.        In cases of difficulty of implementing the policy, help and advice 
                                       can be obtained from the Safety Office.  
                         
                           iii.        It is expected that smokers will take a responsible attitude to the 
                                       practice of smoking at work. Where individuals have difficulty in 
                                       adapting to the policy they should be invited to discuss the issues 
                                       with their manager or academic supervisor and referred to New 
                                       Leaf for support. In the event of persistent non-compliance with 
                                       this policy or in response to specific complaints, appropriate action 
                                       will be taken including, where applicable, disciplinary action. 
                        
                       6.11            Alcohol and Drugs 
                       The University recognises that the excessive use of alcohol and drugs can 
                       lead to increased risks of accidents in laboratories and workshops, etc. and 
                       to long-term adverse effects on the health of the individual concerned. The 
                       University policy is published on the Safety Office Website and aims to 
                       provide support in avoiding these adverse effects.  
                        
                       6.12  Safety of Children and Young Persons on University Premises 
                       The University Policy to ensure the safety of children whilst on its premises 
                       is described in Safety Office Guidance. 
                        
                       Briefly: 
                        
                       Members of the University are discouraged from bringing their children into 
                       University premises (other than the public areas of the public buildings, e.g. 
                       Portland Building and the Libraries) except for social purposes such as 
                       organised functions or brief visits with new-born babies etc. which are 
                       restricted to low hazard areas. 
                        
                       Bringing of children into University premises at other times (e.g. 
                       accompanying the parent whilst at work due to child care difficulties) is at 
                       the sole discretion of the Head of School/Department to whom application 
                       should be made for written authority-which may or may not be granted. 
                        
                       Children must be placed under close supervision at all times whilst on 
                       University premises. 
                        
                       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                                         31 
            This Policy does not apply to organised visits, e.g. open days etc. since they 
            are an integral part of the University’s activities to which the normal safety 
            arrangements would apply. 
             
            6.13    Safety of Adults Companion Assisting in University Work 
            The University Policy to ensure the safety of adults informally assisting 
            members of the University in their work is described in Safety Office 
            Guidance. Briefly, this is discouraged but should the need for this arise then 
            permission for this will be at the discretion of the Head of 
            School/Department. This will be refused where it is believed that the 
            appropriate health and safety measures are not in place. 
             
            6.14    University Residences 
            Safety in University residences is the immediate and full responsibility of 
            Hall Managers who must ensure that members of the accommodation 
            acquaint themselves with the general safety regulations and also the 
            particular regulations applicable to their own building, as well as studying 
            the appropriate Hall Safety Handbook issued to them. 
             
            Events organised in Halls by the JCR (or similar committee) require specific 
            risk assessment in line with Student Union procedures.  
             
            Conference guests are given essential safety information for their stay in 
            Hall accommodation.   
             
            6.15    Work Areas 
            The design and layout of working areas, e.g. workshops, stores, offices, 
            kitchens, must provide adequate space, heat, light and ventilation for both 
            safety and reasonable comfort. Noise levels should be as low as the work 
            permits and within safe working limits. 
             
            Areas of special hazard should be clearly signposted and appropriate 
            equipment should be provided for dealing with the particular hazards 
            present, particularly for persons who do not normally work in the area and 
            who, therefore, need to be made aware of the hazards. Special 
            arrangements should be made for access to such restricted areas. 
             
            6.16    Entry into hazardous areas by contractors and maintenance 
                    staff 
            Entry by contractors and maintenance staff into laboratories, workshops and 
            other hazardous areas is subject to arrangements being made to prevent 
            their exposure to hazardous processes and substances, for example areas 
            where radiation, biohazards, lasers, high power magnets, or toxic chemicals 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              32 
                   are used. The procedure to be followed is published on the safety Office 
                   website. The principles are: 
                        Entry of maintenance operatives into such areas is prohibited without 
                         the permission of a responsible person for the area. Signage with 
                         contact details to be displayed at the entrance to the room, suite, or 
                         building.  
                        The area shall be safe from process hazards for the maintenance work 
                         to proceed. 
                        Entry shall be subject to a permit confirming either that the area is 
                         clear of process hazards or specifying the precautions to be followed to 
                         ensure safety.  
                        Maintenance operatives from both the Estate Office and contractors are 
                         instructed in this procedure.   
                        It is the responsibility of schools and departments to ensure that 
                         independent contractors appointed by them are made aware of these 
                         procedures and are managed in accordance with them. 
                    
                   For planned maintenance the entry form should be emailed to the Helpdesk 
                   at the same time the works request is submitted. This will avoid a delay on 
                   the day. For emergency work a supply of the forms should be available in 
                   the area to be completed at the time. 
                    
                   6.17        Management of Asbestos 
                   The hazardous nature of asbestos and asbestos products is well known and 
                   it is the university's aim that no one is put at risk from this hazard in their 
                   working environment. The Estates Office works to established Asbestos 
                   Procedures and any member of the University who is in doubt about this 
                   issue should contact the Estate Office at the earliest opportunity. 
                    
                   Asbestos incorporated into the fabric of the buildings is managed by the 
                   Estate Office and recorded in the asbestos register for each building. The 
                   Estate Office must be contacted prior to any work involving penetration of 
                   the building fabric in order that the asbestos register can be checked. This 
                   should be done through notifying the Helpdesk at least 7 days before the 
                   work is carried out. 
                    
                   Asbestos components within items of equipment, for example gaskets, 
                   seals, refractory linings and insulation, are the responsibility of its owner, 
                   which must arrange for:  
                              Equipment containing asbestos to be identified, 
                              The condition to be assessed and monitored, 
                              The repair or removal of damaged or deteriorating material,  
                              A record to be kept of condition checks and of any remedial work. 
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      33 
            The Estate Office must be notified any of asbestos-containing equipment so 
            that this can be added into the Asbestos Register. 
             
            A local inventory of asbestos-containing equipment, which identifies the 
            components concerned and records the findings of regular checks, must be 
            maintained. Asbestos-containing material is considered to be in poor 
            condition if the exposed surface is in a state where there are areas of visibly 
            loose fibres that may be released by minimal disturbance. 
             
            Equipment should either be labelled that it contains asbestos or the fact be 
            recorded in operating instructions or other documentation that is readily 
            available and brought to the attention of those who may disturb the material 
            when using the equipment. Any work on the equipment that could disturb 
            the components must be covered by a risk assessment to prevent exposure.  
             
            If confirmation of the presence of asbestos components is required, please 
            contact the Estate Office, which will arrange for the equipment to be 
            checked. 
             
            6.18    Confined Spaces 
            Particular care must be taken when working in confined spaces likely to be 
            unventilated (e.g. storage tanks and service ducts). In these areas there is 
            a risk of the build up of flammable, toxic or suffocating atmospheres, with 
            no obvious indication of the hazard. In such circumstances only specifically 
            trained and authorised persons are permitted to enter, and the necessary 
            required precautions must be taken before work can begin. Entry must be 
            carried out in accordance with a “permit to work” which formalises the 
            precautions needed. For detailed advice please contact the Senior Engineer 
            in the Estate Office or the Safety Office. See also section 7.7 concerning Hot 
            Work Procedures. 
             
            In all high-risk areas and for persons working outside normal working hours 
            there must be ready access to telephones. 
             
            6.19    Working at Height 
            The Work at Height Regulations apply to all work at height where there is a 
            risk of falling that is liable to cause personal injury. There is no minimum 
            height at which they apply as the risk is related to what the person could fall 
            onto as well as the height of the fall. The regulations also concern protection 
            of persons from being struck by falling objects or persons. 
             
            Work at height must be properly planned and organised, and take into 
            account weather conditions that could endanger a person's health and 
            safety. All persons involved in working at height should be trained and 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              34 
            competent. All equipment for working at height must be appropriately 
            inspected. Where work on fragile surfaces is unavoidable this must be 
            properly controlled. 
             
            Access equipment and associated safety equipment must be on a local 
            inventory to enable and record inspections of it. The equipment will usually 
            be colour coded to indicate that it is "in-date". 
             
            The safest and most appropriate work equipment must be used for the task. 
            A ladder may only be used for work at height where the risk assessment 
            demonstrates that the use of more suitable work equipment is not justified 
            because of the low risk and short duration or there are existing features on 
            work area that cannot be altered.  See section 7.12 for guidance on the use 
            of ladders. 
             
            Collective measures to prevent falls (such as guard rails and working 
            platforms) must be chosen before other measures which may only mitigate 
            the distance and consequences of a fall (such as nets or airbags) or which 
            may only provide personal protection from a fall.  
             
            Any equipment used for work at height that is obtained from another 
            organisation or company must be covered by an inspection certificate. 
            Similarly such equipment if transferred from the University to another 
            organisation must be accompanied by a current inspection report.  
             
            Do not loan access equipment to or borrow access equipment from 
            contractors. 
             
            6.20    Respirable Crystalline Silica 
            Silica is one of the most abundant materials in the earth’s crust. There are 
            three different forms: 
                    Quartz – most common, found in most rocks, sands, clays, gravel. 
                    Crystobalite  
                    Tridymite 
             
            Within the University silica may be used or generated in certain laboratory 
            and/or engineering processes. It can also be generated during building 
            operations, such as drilling of concrete and sandblasting masonry. 
             
            Silica in its crystalline form has been classified by the International Agency 
            for Research into Cancer as a Category 1 Carcinogen. Prolonged exposure 
            and inhalation can lead to silicosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
            disease. These are serious conditions leading to permanent disability and 
            early death. 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              35 
             
            As with any other hazardous substances, a risk assessment must be carried 
            out for any procedure which involves the use of silica, or which can generate 
            respirable silica particles and appropriate control measures put in place to 
            eliminate or reduce risk to an acceptable level. Further details can be found 
            in guidance on the Safety Office website. 
             
            6.21    Disposal of Waste Material 
            It should always be remembered that someone else will have to handle 
            material put into waste bins. Therefore do not dispose of hazardous 
            materials except in the approved manner prescribed for your area, and in 
            approved containers. 
             
            Be especially careful with sharp objects of metal and glass, which should be 
            well segregated before disposal. 
             
            Guidance is published on the Safety Office website concerning the particular 
            requirements for the disposal of biologically hazardous/clinical waste and 
            radioactive waste. This is to ensure the waste is packaged, labelled and 
            transferred, or otherwise disposed, of in the correct and safe manner. This 
            is supplemented by local procedures. 
             
            The University Environmental Manager, based within the Estates Office, can 
            provide advice and guidance on waste disposal procedures.  The 
            Sustainability section of the Estates Office website contains more detailed 
            information on the University’s arrangements for disposal of hazardous 
            waste.  
             
            The University has approved a number of licensed waste contractors who 
            must be used for the disposal of hazardous waste. These are listed on the 
            Safety Office website. 
             
            Advice on disposal of radioactive waste can be obtained from the Safety and 
            Radiation Protection Office. 
             
            Any waste containing asbestos must be must be disposed of via the Estate 
            Office to ensure that it goes to a licensed disposal contractor. 
             
            6.22    Out of Hours Working 
            Some Schools are open outside normal working hours for experimental 
            work. The potential dangers of carrying out experimental work alone at 
            night are much greater than normal and this practice should be strongly 
            discouraged. Any practical work out of normal hours must only be carried 
            out with the knowledge of the School Safety Officer and the consent of the 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              36 
            Head of School. If such work is essential, every effort should be made to 
            ensure that another worker is within hearing distance and the Security Staff 
            should be asked to make regular contact. To facilitate this it is essential that 
            any out-of-hours register or equivalent is filled in on entry AND departure 
            from the School or building. 
             
            General study facilities out of normal hours should be concentrated in 
            specific areas to ensure the control and safety of persons involved. Notices 
            to advise on the action to take in case of emergency should be posted in 24-
            hour access computer rooms. 
            6.23    Lone Working 
            The University acknowledges that there may be implications for its 
            employees, students, visitors and contractors when working alone. Whilst 
            there is no general legal prohibition on working alone there are some 
            specific legal prohibitions affecting a small number of well-established 
            dangerous situations such as working with live electrical conductors and 
            entry into confined spaces. 
             
            Wherever possible lone working should be avoided but where there is a real 
            requirement for lone working a suitable risk assessment must be carried out 
            to identify the risks to the lone worker and safe working arrangements must 
            be identified and introduced to minimise the risks as far as is reasonably 
            practicable.  
             
            Those who may be at risk shall be provided with information and training as 
            appropriate in order to minimise the risks when working remotely from 
            colleagues or other persons and/or outside normal working hours. 
            The arrangements that the University considers to be best practice are 
            described in separate guidance that is available on the Safety Office 
            website.  Where this guidance does not cover a particular situation, further 
            advice may be sought from the Safety Office. 
            6.24    Work Experience 
            The University welcomes and encourages work experience placements for 
            children below statutory school leaving age and young adults and recognises 
            that they are an important part of secondary education. Guidance has been 
            developed to ensure that the placement is planned and organised in such a 
            way as to provide a safe and interesting learning experience for the student. 
             
            Health and safety Regulations place the following requirements on 
            employers concerning these types of placements: 
             
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              37 
                         1.          To take particular account of certain specified factors when 
                                     carrying out or reviewing risk assessments; 
                         2.          That the risk assessment be carried out before the young 
                                     person starts work; 
                         3.          To prohibit young person from certain work if risk assessment 
                                     identifies a significant risk which cannot be eliminated; and 
                         4.          In cases where the young person is a child, to provide 
                                     information to parents/guardians/carers concerning the risk 
                                     assessment. 
                   All work experience placements must have the approval of the Head of 
                   School/Manager in charge or a person with delegated authority of the 
                   HOS/Manager. The School/Departmental Safety Officer must also be 
                   consulted and involved in setting up the placement. Guidance on the issues 
                   relating to setting up placements is available on the Safety Office website. 
                   This includes templates for the risk assessment and correspondence with 
                   parents/guardians/carers. In particular the young person must: 
                    
                        Not be left alone in the School/department, nor work alone or out of 
                         hours, and must be properly supervised at all times.  
                    
                        Not be exposed to ionising radiation.  
                    
                        Not be involved in work with any carcinogenic or toxic substances and 
                         must be kept away from areas where such materials are handled. 
                    
                        Not work beyond their physical or psychological capabilities. They must 
                         not be involved in lifting or handling of significant loads. Contact with 
                         patients will only be considered after thorough assessment has been 
                         made of the psychological risks [see below if relevant]. 
                    
                        Not be exposed to excessive noise, vibration, heat or cold. 
                    
                              Not be exposed directly to respiratory sensitisers.  
                    
                        Not be involved in the use of workshop machinery with moving parts, 
                         automatic/semi-automatic cutting machinery, guillotines, power 
                         presses, woodworking machinery, compressed air tools or similar 
                         hazardous machinery. 
                    
                   Applications concerning children under the statutory school leaving age 
                   should be arranged through the local education authority’s placement 
                   organisation. This will address many of these requirements. 
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      38 
                   6.25 Team Building Events 
                   Participation in team building events or away days will usually be as part of 
                   a person’s employment. Such events might include unusual and/or higher 
                   risk activities such as climbing or assault courses or be in unfamiliar 
                   environments. Guidance is available on the Safety Office website to ensure 
                   that the university’s responsibilities relating to the planning of these are 
                   addressed. 
                    
                   The external facilitator or provider will be primarily responsible for the 
                   safety of the equipment and the conduct of activities provided by them. 
                   However, the University is responsible for making reasonable attempts to 
                   establish the competency of the provider and the suitability of the activity. 
                   There is also likely to be a need to provide information to the participants to 
                   ensure that they are properly prepared and know what to expect. 
                    
                   The key elements include: 
                              Ensuring a risk assessment is carried out for any hazardous 
                               activities 
                              Ensuring appropriate health and safety information is obtained from 
                               the event provider  
                              Checking suitability of the activity for participating staff  
                              Ensuring appropriate levels of employee and public liability 
                               insurance is in place where external providers are used. 
                               Commercial services must be consulted in relation to the insurance 
                               implications for hazardous activities organised within the 
                               University. 
                    
                   6.26        Industrial Visits 
                   When undertaking an industrial visit the host organisation will normally be 
                   responsible for ensuring the safety of those visiting. The School concerned 
                   should ensure that staff and students visiting an industrial site understand 
                   the local safety requirements and comply with them. 
                    
                   6.27        Student Placements 
                   The primary responsibility for the health and safety of placement students 
                   lies with the employer providing the placement. However, the University has 
                   produced guidelines to ensure that placements are satisfactory in terms of 
                   their health and safety standards. They relate to placements where a 
                   student works for an employer as a temporary employee and is required to 
                   do so as part of the course of study, typically commercial or industrial 
                   situations. 
                    
                   The placement provider must have been formally approved by the 
                   University, the student will be provided with general health and safety 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      39 
            information, and conditions at the placement will be monitored by a 
            combination of tutors’ visits, and feedback from the student as appropriate. 
            Any concerns that a student has about health and safety standards at their 
            placement should be notified to their academic supervisor. If the placement 
            is outside of Great Britain then appropriate personal travel insurance should 
            be taken out. 
             
            Each School is responsible for having adequate arrangements in place. 
            Further detailed information is published on the Safety Office website.  
             
            6.28    Working Overseas 
            Whilst working overseas individuals may be exposed to additional non-work 
            related hazards arising out of the general conditions within the country 
            being visited, e.g. tropical diseases, crime or political instability. Guidelines 
            have been issued to enable these issues to be assessed and the visit 
            planned accordingly.  Information on the latest situation in any country may 
            be accessed via the Safety Office website.  
             
            When planning an overseas trip, the organiser or individual should 
            consult the MASTA Travel Health website, which has comprehensive 
            health advice for travellers and also contact either their GP or local Travel 
            Clinic (available at Cripps Health Centre and in Nottingham City Centre) at 
            the earliest opportunity to identify and organise the vaccinations they 
            require. Contact arrangements between the University and the host at the 
            destination should also be established. 
            A checklist of practical tips to help overcome the kinds of problems, which 
            may arise, is included in the above guidelines.  
             
            6.29    Fieldwork 
            Fieldwork is defined as any practical work carried out by staff or students of 
            the University for the purpose of teaching or research in places which are 
            not under the direct supervisory control of the University, but where the 
            University is responsible for the safety of its staff, students, or others who 
            may be affected by their activities. 
             
            School policy in relation to fieldwork activities must include procedures to 
            ensure adequate risk assessment, the establishment of safe working 
            procedures, clear lines of responsibility in the field, competence, training, 
            and fitness of individuals to do the work, contingency plans for foreseeable 
            problems and procedures for the review of the safety of fieldwork activities. 
             
            Group working is preferred. Lone-working in the field presents particularly 
            high risks and should be avoided whenever possible. Particularly stringent 
            codes of practice are required for unsupervised work. 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              40 
              
             Where fieldwork is carried out on the premises of another organisation, 
             Schools should be satisfied that the local safety procedures are adequate for 
             the work envisaged and that the individuals concerned understand and 
             comply with them. 
              
             Schools should also ensure that accommodation for field trips outside the 
             United Kingdom meets an acceptable standard of safety. Where possible 
             such accommodation should be booked through a travel agency or tour 
             operator affiliated to the Association of British Travel Agents.  
              
             Expeditions to hostile, remote and/or inaccessible locations present a higher 
             degree of risk than standard field expeditions. As such they will require 
             rigorous risk assessment and identification of control measures to reduce 
             risks to a level that is acceptable to both the University and the individual 
             participants. 
              
             The University Safety Committee has established an Expedition Peer Review 
             Panel [EPRP] comprised of University employees who have experience of 
             organising these types of expedition and who will review and approve risk 
             assessments and emergency response plan and advise the relevant Head of 
             School as to its adequacy or otherwise. 
              
             The University has also engaged the services of International SOS to 
             provide advice on high risk expeditions and security, medical assistance and 
             evacuation of casualties in event of emergency.   
              
             The University Guidelines for Safety in Fieldwork and the associated 
             addendum for high risk expeditions which is available on the Safety Office 
             website should be consulted for further information. 
              
             6.30     Diving Operations 
             Any diving carried out as part of a work activity is subject to the Diving at 
             Work Regulations 1997. Diving in pursuance of the activities of the 
             University, such as fieldwork activities and student projects that include 
             diving to obtain samples or to study underwater systems etc. would be 
             subject to these requirements. Although limited to operations within Great 
             Britain and its territorial waters the Regulations provide a sound framework 
             that should be applied to diving projects elsewhere unless adequately 
             covered by other local legislation.  
              
             The Safety Office must be notified in advance of any proposal for a work-
             related University activity involving diving in order that necessary 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                  41 
            notifications to HSE can be made and appropriate arrangements confirmed. 
            A minimum of 3 months should be allowed for this.  
             
            Diving operations require formal risk assessment and diving management 
            arrangements by way of “diving project” plans and records, and the 
            appointment of competent diving supervisors. Each diving project must be 
            controlled by a single person who is responsible for planning, managing and 
            conducting the work safely. A diving project plan (in effect a written risk 
            assessment covering all the various operations, identification of supervisors 
            and describing the information and instructions given to the divers) must be 
            prepared before diving commences and kept up to date. A competent, 
            formally qualified “diving supervisor” must be appointed to supervise those 
            operations that they are responsible for. There must only be one diving 
            supervisor for each diving operation and they must not participate in the 
            dive. 
             
            The individual divers must be formally qualified and posses a certificate of 
            medical fitness to dive as issued by an HSE approved medical practitioner 
            (this can be arranged through Occupational Health). Divers must keep a 
            record of each dive in a logbook, which must be retained for at least 2 years 
            after the last entry. 
             
            There are some relaxations relating to work as part of diver training, 
            recreation and activities carried out in a swimming pool or similar. 
            Further information can be obtained from the Safety Office. Safety Office 
            Guidance is also available from the website. 
             
            6.31    Threatening or violent situations. 
            These guidelines relate to a violent and/or threatening, or potentially violent 
            and/or threatening, behaviour or situations on University property. 
             
            The situations to which these guidelines relate include verbal abuse, threats, 
            and physical attacks.  
             
            With over 30,000 students and 5000 staff and numerous daily visitors to the 
            University it is not always easy to either predict or guard against violent or 
            threatening behaviour. It is incumbent on all staff and students to be 
            vigilant and aware of their surroundings and the potential for any situation 
            to become threatening or violent. 
             
            Incidents of work-related violence should be reported to the Safety Office 
            on a University accident report form and might require notification to the 
            Health and Safety Executive. Such incidents are monitored by the Safety 
            Office and reported to the Safety Committee. 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              42 
                 
                Where the nature of the work activities or environment is such that there is 
                a particular risk of encountering a threatening or violent situation then this 
                should be included in the risk assessment for the activity or area. The 
                Security Office should be consulted for advice on physical and procedural 
                measures, including training, to minimise the risk. The Safety Office can also 
                offer advice. 
                 
                Actions to be taken in the event of a threatening or violent situation. 
                 
                      1.   If a situation is likely to become threatening or violent and if 
                           possible leave the area, having alerted other staff, students or 
                           visitors in the area. 
                       
                      2.   Report any incidents as soon as possible to University Security 
                           using the emergency number 8888. 
                 
                      3.   If a situation does become violent and/or threatening if possible do 
                           not get involved unless in self-defence or to save life. 
                       
                      4.   Never try to protect property, life is more important. 
                       
                      5.   If the situation warrants phone the Police before University 
                           Security. 
                If you have been affected by a threatening or violent situation you might 
                find it helpful to contact the University Counselling service. 
                 
                6.32       Driving on University Business 
                General 
                It is important that anyone driving on University business takes note of the 
                guidance contained in  the document ‘ Driving on University Business’ which 
                is available on the safety office website and must be read in conjunction 
                with the University’s Business Travel Policy which can be found on 
                Commercial Services website. In summary anyone driving on University 
                business, is required to: 
                          Adhere to the Road Traffic legislation and the Highway Code 
                           published by HMSO.  
                          Drive with due care and consideration for themselves and other 
                           road users.  
                          Adhere to University Traffic Regulations when driving on 
                           University campuses. These Regulations include requirements 
                           relating to speed limits, permits, roadworthiness and parking.  
                          Be aware of insurance and breakdown service contact details if 
                           driving a University vehicle.  
                Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                             43 
                              Ensure that when driving a privately owned vehicle it is 
                               roadworthy, has a current MOT where applicable, is insured for 
                               business use and has a valid road fund license.  
                              Possess a valid licence to drive the vehicle. 
                              All drivers driving under the University motor insurance policy must 
                               hold a valid permit to drive. 
                    
                   In addition there are specific University policies that prohibit drivers from: 
                              Using hand-held mobile phones whilst driving on University 
                               business. Drivers are discouraged from receiving or making phone 
                               calls on hands free phones. Where hands free phones are required 
                               these should be obtained via the telephone services manager and 
                               meet the required standard.  
                              Smoking in University vehicles and in any other case whilst 
                               travelling with others on University business. 
                    
                   The University does not advocate or condone illegal parking or driving in 
                   excess of speed limits. Payment of any fines or court costs resulting from 
                   these activities is the driver’s responsibility and will not be met by the 
                   University. 
                    
                   6.33        Minibus Driving 
                   There are some particular restrictions that apply to drivers of minibuses. 
                   Those who passed their car driving test before 1st January 1997 may drive 
                   minibuses with up to 16 passenger seats and tow a trailer exceeding 750kg, 
                   subject to a vehicle/trailer combination limit of 8.25 tonnes (gross vehicle 
                   weight), until their current driving licence expires. This applies within the 
                   UK. However, those passing their car test from 1st January 1997 may only 
                   drive vehicles up to a maximum of 8 passenger seats. To drive minibuses 
                   with 9 to 16 passenger seats an additional driving test is required to obtain 
                   Category D1 (or D1+E to tow a trailer exceeding 750kg) entitlement on 
                   their licence.  
                    
                   Any person wishing to drive a minibus and holding a driving licence that was 
                   issued before 1st January 1997 is required to undertake an assessment via 
                   the Minibus Driver Awareness Scheme (MIDAS). This is valid for 4 years 
                   after which it must be refreshed. Similarly any minibus driver with the D1 
                   entitlement on their driving licence must also undertake MIDAS refreshers 
                   every 4 years from the fourth anniversary of the licence issue date. 
                    
                   All minibus drivers must be notified to Procurement. There is a minimum 
                   age (for insurance purposes) of 25 for driving minibuses belonging to or 
                   hired by the University. 
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      44 
       When taken abroad, minibuses must be fitted with a tachograph and 
       Procurement must be informed. Any members of the University driving a 
       minibus abroad must pass the D1 test independently of when they passed 
       their car-driving test. Documentation is also required: "Own account 
       certificates" if the minibus is owned by the University and "Waybills" if the 
       minibus is hired. Procurement has copies of these forms. 
        
       All minibuses owned or hired by the University must display a “small bus 
       permit”. Contact Procurement for further information. 
        
       Please refer to the University's Code of Practice for the Safe Use of 
       Minibuses. 
        
       6.34   Use of Mobile Phones Whilst Driving on University Business 
       It is illegal to use a hand-held mobile phone whilst driving. Members of the 
       University must not use hand-held mobile phones whilst driving any vehicle, 
       including personally owned, university owned or hired to the University, 
       whilst driving on University business. If it is necessary to be contactable 
       whilst driving then the Head of School or Department may authorise a 
       suitable hands-free kit, obtainable via the Telephone Services Manager. 
       Alternatively the phone should be left to divert to voicemail and answered at 
       a safe time whilst not driving. 
        
       Wherever possible telephoning colleagues whilst they are driving should be 
       avoided. 
        
       The University policy on use of mobile phones whilst driving is published on 
       the Safety Office website. 
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           45 
                   Section 7: Precautions with 
                   Work Equipment 
                    
                   7.1         Statutory Requirements 
                   Great care should be taken when using any machinery to avoid both 
                   personal injury and damage to equipment. School codes of workshop 
                   practice, establishing who may use any particular equipment, the times of 
                   such use and the conditions governing such use, must be strictly observed. 
                   Only trained and authorised persons should be allowed to use hazardous 
                   equipment and adequate arrangements should be made to prevent their use 
                   by unauthorised persons. 
                    
                   The Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1998 apply to work 
                   equipment, the definition of work equipment being any machinery 
                   appliance, apparatus or tool, or any assembly of components which in order 
                   to achieve a common end are arranged and controlled so that they function 
                   as a whole. This definition is very wide and examples would include power 
                   press, guillotine, air compressor, lifting sling, microbiological safety cabinet, 
                   portable drill and overhead projector.  
                    
                   The regulations cover two aspects of safety in relation to work equipment:  
                        Management issues - selection and suitability, maintenance, 
                         information, instruction and training and compliance with Product Safety 
                         Regulations. 
                        Physical characteristics - machinery guarding, other specified hazards, 
                         extremes of temperature, controls, isolation, stability, lighting, 
                         markings and warnings. 
                    
                   For further details, please refer to Safety Office Guidance relating to Work 
                   Equipment.  
                    
                   Subsequent sections below deal with specific issues and certain types of 
                   equipment. 
                    
                   Suppliers of work equipment have a duty to design work equipment in line 
                   with these regulations and Schools should be aware of the requirements 
                   when introducing new work equipment.  
                    
                   The Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 1992 are one example of 
                   product safety regulations.  These regulations give essential health and 
                   safety requirements which equipment should be designed in accordance 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      46 
             with, prior to supply in EC countries. The CE mark should indicate that 
             relevant product safety regulations have been complied with. 
              
             In-house Construction of Work Equipment 
             Work equipment manufactured in-house at the University must comply with 
             the above in terms of satisfying the essential health and safety 
             requirements (EHSRs). Specific University guidance is available. As a 
             minimum, relevant technical information relating to the construction must 
             be gathered together and a checklist of the EHSRs must be completed to 
             demonstrate that they have been adequately covered. 
              
             Certain types of equipment can contain a radioactive source even though 
             the equipment might not be considered as being used for radioactive 
             purposes. An example is the use of a small source as part of a monitor or 
             detector (e.g. electron capture detectors used with some gas 
             chromatographs and some types of static eliminators). The information 
             provided by the manufacturer or supplier should indicate if a radioactive 
             source is present. The Safety Office must be notified in advance of the 
             equipment coming onto site as these sources are strictly regulated. 
              
             7.2     Clothing and Personal Protective Equipment  
             Loose clothing must not be worn near moving machinery. Particular 
             attention should be paid to ties and other forms of neckwear. Suitable 
             footwear must be worn in workshops and laboratories. Long hair must be 
             protected from contact with machinery by wearing suitable headgear. 
             Goggles must be worn when using grinding wheels or any other process 
             where there are flying particles. The use of dust masks is recommended 
             where there is prolonged exposure to dust or particles. Rings should not be 
             worn when using machinery. 
              
             7.3     Guarding 
             Hazardous machinery must always be guarded. The British Standards 
             Institute has published a document, PD5304:2000, “Safe Use of Machinery” 
             which gives practical guidance on complying with the relevant BSEN 
             Standards (which are also listed). This document can be accessed through 
             the Safety Office website. 
               
             Do not use machinery without the appropriate guards and be sure that 
             guards are replaced after a machine has been re- set. Guard interlocking 
             devices must never be defeated. Report any defects in guards or interlocks 
             immediately. 
              
             Suitable guards should be provided for destructive testing machines to 
             prevent injury from any flying particles. 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 47 
              
             7.4     Machinery Noise 
             It is the aim of the University to minimise the risk of noise induced hearing 
             damage to all who may be affected by keeping exposure to noise as low as 
             is reasonably practicable and where the Upper Action Value is likely to be 
             exceeded, control measures will be put in place to reduce it. Heads of 
             Schools must ensure that appropriate measures are taken to deal with noise 
             from machinery. 
              
             The Noise at Work Regulations require that assessment of noise levels must 
             be made wherever there is a noisy environment. In any cases of excessive 
             noise, steps must be taken to reduce this at source. If this is not practicable 
             then ear protection must be made available to employees, who must wear it 
             in any prescribed areas of high noise level.  
              
             The lower exposure level (first action level) is 80dB(A) as an 8-hour time-
             weighted average (8-hour TWA). This is the level at which hearing 
             protection must be made available. 
              
             The upper exposure level (second action level) is 85dB(A) (8-hour TWA). 
             This is the level above which engineering controls should be used as far as 
             is reasonably practicable to reduce the noise exposure, for example by noise 
             enclosure of equipment, silencers, sound refuges etc. Where noise levels 
             remain above this the area will become a compulsory hearing protection 
             area. 
              
             There is also an Exposure Limit Value of 87dB(A) (8-hour TWA). This is the 
             level of noise above which a person may not be exposed having taken into 
             account the noise controls to be used and the pattern of exposure. 
              
             The peak sound pressure level is 137dB(C) - i.e. from instantaneous or 
             percussive operations. 
              
             Audiometry is required for those exposed to noise above 85dB(A) and is 
             carried out by Occupational Health. This should be done initially and every 3 
             years although in some circumstances Occupational Health might consider 
             that shorter intervals of 1 or 2 years are appropriate. Individuals can also 
             request a check in between if they have any concerns. 
              
             Further more detailed guidance is published on the Safety Office website. 
              
             7.5     Abrasive Wheels 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 48 
             Only authorised persons who have received an approved course of 
             instruction are allowed to change or dress abrasive wheels. The maximum 
             spindle speed should be marked on the equipment. 
              
             The grinding of aluminium and magnesium requires special care and the 
             appropriate literature should be consulted. 
              
             7.6     Welding 
             Electric welding is a powerful source of light with a high ultra violet light 
             content which is very dangerous to the eyes (see section on electromagnetic 
             radiations). Any areas where welding is taking place must be suitably 
             screened and ventilated. 
              
             Manual electric arc welding involves the operator working in close proximity 
             to the live electrode and the workpiece with the consequent danger of 
             receiving an electric shock. Although relatively low voltages are involved 
             whilst welding, higher open circuit no-load voltages are required to strike 
             the arc. These can be up to 80V ac or 100V dc and can be dangerous in 
             confined conducting locations or wet surroundings. Earthing of the 
             workpiece and of any metalwork in contact with it is important. The welding 
             return lead should be placed as close as possible to the point of welding. 
             The welding leads should be fully insulated. In the case of the return lead 
             poor positioning or damaged insulation can result in stray currents which 
             could damage safety critical parts of other equipment. 
              
             7.7     Hotwork 
             Hot Work is defined as work involving the application or generation of heat 
             such as cutting, welding, brazing, soldering and the use of blowlamps. Hot 
             work involving the application of heat, either directly to, or adjacent to 
             plant, tanks, vessels and pipes that have contained or do contain explosive, 
             flammable or toxic substances can create the following hazards: 
                Explosion as a result of flammable vapours under pressure being ignited 
                 within a confined space. 
                Fire from sparks and heat generated in areas containing combustible 
                 and flammable materials 
                Eye injury including ultra-violet damage, burns, heat exhaustion 
                Asphyxiation by gases or vapours or poisoning by toxic fumes 
              
             For routine hotwork, such as that carried out in designated facilities, a 
             standard operating procedure must be drawn up which can be followed each 
             time the hotwork is carried out. 
              
             For non-routine hotwork, a risk assessment must be carried out by a 
             competent person and a Permit to Work issued for each job taking into 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 49 
             account the specific hazards involved. This applies to hotwork carried out by 
             contractors as well as University staff. 
              
             Further guidance is available from the Safety Office website.  
              
             7.8     Use of Compressed Gases 
             The main hazards from compressed gases are 
                Explosion of the cylinder due to mechanical damage, weakness or over-
                 pressurisation  
                Exposure to released gas or fluid, which may have harmful properties 
                 [asphyxiant, toxic, corrosive]. Oxygen is particularly dangerous as it 
                 can promote fires and explosion and sustains combustion.  
                Fire due to escape of flammable gas/fluid. 
                Over-pressurisation in the event of fire 
                Impact from falling cylinders 
                Manual handling injuries 
              
             Standard Precautions to  be observed 
                No person should use a gas cylinder or change the cylinder regulator 
                 unless they have received appropriate training and are authorised to do 
                 so by their supervisor or line manager. 
                Ensure the regulator and pipework is appropriate for the type of gas 
                 and pressure regime. 
                Wear a suitable face visor or safety glasses [to protect against impact] 
                 when changing/fitting regulators. 
                Do not use grease or PTFE tape on threads - this can present an 
                 explosion risk and indicates unsatisfactory seal being made which could 
                 leak. 
                Check for leaks using leak detection fluid - proprietary sprays are 
                 recommended. [Tepol/water can be used as vegetable based but soapy 
                 water must not be used as it is oil-based]. 
                Use only brass spanners (these do not create sparks) when fitting 
                 regulators to cylinders of highly flammable gas. 
                Ensure the cylinder is secured in a trolley or securely chained/strapped 
                 to the wall or bench. 
                Transport cylinders in suitable trolleys with dust cowls in place. 
                Wear suitable safety shoes when transporting cylinders. 
                Store in a safe place outside or in a room that has adequate ventilation. 
                Do not store flammable gases near any source of ignition. 
              
             Gas cylinders should be handled gently and used only with the correct 
             fittings. In particular the materials from which any components of the 
             system are made should be compatible with the gas being used. Detailed 
             information on this is contained in British Compressed Gases Association 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 50 
       publications (CP4 and CP5 are particularly relevant and can be accessed via 
       the safety Office web-site). They should always be secured to prevent them 
       being knocked over accidentally. Cylinder valves must not be lubricated. 
        
       Cylinders of compressed gases can be a hazard if fire breaks out. Wherever 
       practicable all cylinders containing gas should be kept outside a building in a 
       well-ventilated area.  
        
       Oxygen is particularly dangerous since it is more likely to promote fires or 
       explosions than is air. Compressed air should be used with caution and 
       never in the context of practical jokes. 
        
       Acetylene used at > 9p.s.i. is subject to specific regulation and special 
       notification to the appropriate agency is required. Contact Safety Office for 
       details. 
        
       Inspection & Maintenance 
        
       University guidance informs Schools/Departments of the key requirements 
       for the safe operation and management of piped compressed gas systems 
       attached to transportable gas cylinders and stand-alone transportable 
       compressed gas cylinder installations. The primary objective is to prevent 
       danger from unintentional release of stored energy. Information on the 
       competency requirements for the design, installation, operation and 
       maintenance of systems is included as well as the frequency of 
       maintenance; testing and examination regimes that are required for the 
       various high and low pressure components which make up such systems. 
        
       Due to the increased dangers associated with the use of stand-alone 
       transportable compressed gas cylinders located in buildings in the event of 
       fire, the guidance also specifies the circumstances under which such stand-
       alone systems should be considered and the justification required for their 
       use.  
        
       Schools/departments where compressed gases are used/stored should 
       ensure that regulators are inspected visually and tested for correct function 
       e.g. creep test;  associated pipe-work checked for leaks;  pressure relief 
       valves checked for correct operation by a competent trained person at least 
       annually.  
        
       Regulators and other high pressure components such as flame arrestors, 
       hoses & pigtail should be exchanged on a five yearly cycle. Pressure relief 
       valves should be exchanged or serviced on a six yearly cycle   
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           51 
             Further reference may be made to  the BOC publication ‘Safe Under 
             Pressure (also available on video] and in HSE Guidance note INDG 308 (May 
             2000] ‘The safe use of gas cylinders’ and BCGA Code  Of Practice, CP23. For 
             application of the Pressure Systems Safety Regulations, please refer to 
             Section 7.14. 
              
             7.9     Paint Spraying 
             Paint spraying must only be carried out in a suitably ventilated area or 
             booth complying with the appropriate regulations. Particular care must be 
             taken when using isocyanate containing (“2-pack”) paints since this material 
             is a potent respiratory sensitiser. Additional precautions include total 
             protective clothing, airline-fed breathing apparatus and health surveillance 
             by the Occupational Health Unit. 
              
             7.10    Woodworking Machinery 
             Woodworking machines are particularly dangerous and difficult to guard and 
             it is essential that only adequately trained persons should operate them. 
             Access by other persons must be prevented. The Woodworking Machines 
             Regulations 1974 have been revoked and superseded by the Provision and 
             Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1998. In addition there is HSE guidance 
             and an approved code of practice specifically concerning the safety of 
             Woodworking Machinery. 
              
             7.11    Centrifuges 
             Large quantities of energy are stored in the rotor of a centrifuge when in 
             operation and it is necessary for users to have adequate instruction in the 
             correct method of operation of these machines. 
             Centrifuges should conform to BSEN 12547:1999+A1:2009. 
              
             7.12    Ladders 
             Work should not be done from ladders if it is reasonably practicable to use 
             other forms of access equipment - see section 6.3 for guidance on work at 
             height. 
              
             Ladders and other forms of access equipment should be inspected regularly, 
             including before and after use, and if any defect is found immediate action 
             should be taken. Wooden ladders and steps must not be painted. They 
             should be checked for rot, decay or mechanical damage such as warped 
             stiles, excessive cracks, splintering and wear and tear at the head and foot 
             of the stiles. Rungs should be checked for looseness, excessive wear, or 
             decay where the rung enters the stile. Metal ladders should be checked for 
             twisting, distortion, oxidation, corrosion and excessive wear, especially on 
             the treads. 
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 52 
            In use a ladder must always stand level and firm footing and be placed at 
            an angle of 75 degrees (1 foot horizontal for each 4 feet vertical). 
             
            For ladders less than 10 feet long it is sufficient to ensure that the ladder is 
            securely placed so as to prevent it from slipping of falling. Longer ladders 
            should be securely fixed at the upper end or if this is not practicable, at or 
            near the lower end. If neither of these is practicable then a person must be 
            stationed at the foot of the ladder when in use to prevent it slipping, but this 
            concession can only be applied when the ladder is less than 20 feet long. 
             
            Arrangements should always be made to support the ladder to prevent 
            undue swaying or sagging. When in use over- reaching and the carrying of 
            loads should be avoided. 
             
            7.13    Lifting Equipment 
            Each School/Department owning lifting equipment will have appointed a 
            Responsible Person to co-ordinate maintenance and examination of such 
            equipment. All new items of lifting equipment must be notified at the time of 
            installation or purchase to the Responsible Person who will arrange for them 
            to be insured and regularly inspected in line with the Lifting Operations and 
            Lifting Equipment Regulations 1998. The procedure for this can be found via 
            the Safety Office website.  
             
            Equipment such as lifts, cranes, chairs, ropes and slings must not be loaded 
            beyond the safe working loads specified for each one. Safe loads must be 
            clearly marked on each piece of equipment and the appliances should be 
            tested periodically, as advised by the insurance inspector. 
            Forklifts must be operated by authorised persons only. The standard to 
            which operators should be trained is specified in the Approved Code of 
            Practice “Rider Operated Lift Trucks - Operator Training”. 
             
            7.14    Pressure Systems  
            The Pressure Systems Safety Regulations 2000 require that all pressure 
            vessels and certain parts of their associated pipework must be assessed 
            initially to determine the appropriate regime of regular inspection and 
            testing ("written scheme of examination"). Thereafter arrangements must 
            be made for this inspection and testing to be undertaken at the correct 
            intervals. 
             
            Therefore the details of all systems, including for example autoclaves and 
            air receivers, must be notified at the time of installation or purchase to the 
            Department or School's Responsible Person, who will arrange for them to be 
            assessed, insured and regularly inspected. The procedure for this is 
            available on the Safety Office website.  
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              53 
             
            The safe working limits of the system must be clearly marked on it. As a 
            minimum this should include the maximum pressure for safe working. 
            Larger, complex systems may also require marking with temperature, time, 
            volume, flow rate, heat input or coolant flow limits as appropriate. The 
            operating instructions should contain all the information needed for safe 
            operation of the system including start-up, shutdown, standby and 
            emergency situations. 
             
            In addition to any thorough examinations in accordance with the written 
            scheme, the system should be subject to routine maintenance and 
            inspection checks. These checks should include looking for signs of 
            corrosion, leakage and external damage. Particular attention should be paid 
            to the seals at doors and lids. Systems should be regularly cleaned out or 
            drained of condensate, to ensure the removal of corrosive residues. 
             
            7.15    Autoclaves 
            Staff operating autoclaves must receive adequate instruction and 
            supervision. Manufacturer’s operating instructions must be observed at all 
            times. Any seals or pressure relief valves should be examined carefully at 
            frequent intervals for signs of wear, usually cracking or hardening. Seals 
            and valves may also require regular replacement irrespective of condition—
            follow manufacturer’s recommendations. 
             
            Always wear a face visor and heat resistant gloves when removing material 
            from the autoclave and never attempt to do so until the temperature of the 
            contents is below 80 C otherwise an explosion may occur. 
             
            7.16    Vehicles 
            University vehicles must be driven only by appropriately trained and 
            authorised persons. This includes forklift trucks and other battery operated 
            vehicles. In particular, drivers of rider-operated forklift trucks must have 
            passed an accredited course of instruction and be formally authorised for a 
            specified period of time.  Although not a legal requirement, in the interests 
            of best practice, all operators must hold a full UK driving (category B) car 
            licence to operate University owned Lift Trucks. 
             
            Although there is no specific legal requirement to provide refresher training 
            after set intervals, lift-truck operators need to be re-assessed from time to 
            time to ensure that they continue to operate lift trucks safely. This 
            assessment should form part of a school / departments normal monitoring 
            procedures and be formally time-tabled to ensure that it is done at a 
            suggested interval of not greater than three years. In addition to routine 
            monitoring formal re-assessment is likely to be needed where operators:  
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              54 
                              Have not used Lift Trucks for some time.  
                              Are occasional / infrequent users.   
                              Appear to have developed unsafe working practices.  
                              Have had an accident or a near miss.  
                              Have experienced a change to their working practices or 
                               environment. 
                              Have experienced a change in personal circumstances which could 
                               potentially affect their performance as a Lift Truck operator. 
                    
                    
                   Drivers must be aware of any special areas into which vehicles must not be 
                   taken, e.g. areas in which highly flammable liquids are used or stored. Fuel 
                   for vehicles or stationary engines must be kept in the appropriate licensed 
                   storage. 
                    
                   If a vehicle becomes faulty, there must be a system for this to be reported 
                   immediately. If the fault is potentially dangerous, e.g. in the braking 
                   system, arrangements must be made for all potential users to be made 
                   aware of this and for the vehicle to be rendered physically incapable of use 
                   until satisfactory repairs have been carried out. 
                    
                   Please see section 6.12 for Minibus Driving information. 
                    
                   7.17        Vibration 
                   Prolonged use of high-vibration hand-held or hand-guided tools is associated 
                   with a risk of developing Hand-Arm Vibration Syndrome (HAVS). This 
                   condition may result in effects to the hands and arms, including impaired 
                   blood circulation and damage to the nerves and muscles. It is felt as a 
                   tingling or numbness in the fingers or where finger blanching occurs. There 
                   are other names for the condition: 'vibration white finger', 'dead finger' and 
                   Secondary Raynaud's Syndrome. There are however other medical 
                   conditions that may cause similar effects. 
                    
                   The affects are cumulative and as time passes the attacks may involve 
                   considerable pain and loss of manual dexterity, resulting in clumsiness and 
                   reduced grip strength.  
                    
                   Although the risk depends on the magnitude of the vibration and length of 
                   exposure, the grip, push and other forces used to guide and apply vibrating 
                   tools or workpieces, temperature, smoking and individual susceptibility can 
                   also influence the condition. 
                    
                   The following is an indicative list of the types of equipment found in the 
                   University that may present a vibration hazard: 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      55 
                        Grounds work, e.g. chainsaws, strimmers, mowers, blowers, 
                         hedgetrimmers, etc.  
                        Workshop equipment, e.g. grinding tools, rotary burring tools, powered 
                         hammers, concrete breakers, sanders and drills. 
                        Grinders and other rotary tools 
                        Timber and wood machining tools 
                        Percussive metal-working tools 
                        Percussive tools used in stoneworking, quarrying, and construction. 
                    
                   The Control of Vibration Regulations came into force in April 2005. They lay 
                   down specific exposure limit values and action values: 
                        For hand-arm vibration the daily exposure limit value is 5 m/s² A(8) 
                         and the daily exposure action value is 2.5m/s² A(8) 
                        For whole body vibration the daily exposure limit value is 1.15m/s² 
                         A(8) and the daily exposure action value is 0.5m/s² A(8) 
                    
                   Further more detailed guidance is published on the Safety Office website. 
                    
                   If there is a significant risk of HAVS, i.e. where an individual's vibration 
                   exposure exceeds 2.5m/s2, then a health surveillance programme via the 
                   University's Occupational Health provider must be arranged. The aim of this 
                   is to identify at an early stage any member of staff who may be showing 
                   medical signs of developing HAVS. If at any time between the routine 
                   checks, a member of staff notices any of the signs of HAVS, they should 
                   report it to their line manager in order that referral to Occupational Health 
                   can be organised and investigation of the equipment carried out by the 
                   School/Department. 
                    
                   Should a user of such equipment feel that performance has deteriorated in 
                   terms of vibration, they must report it at the earliest opportunity so that 
                   further investigations can be made. Also if a user notices any of the signs of 
                   HAVS, they should report it to their line manager in order that referral to 
                   Occupational Health can be organised and investigation of the equipment 
                   carried out by the School/Department.  
                    
                   7.18        General 
                   Horseplay and practical joking is very dangerous in workshops. Never direct 
                   a jet of compressed air against anybody or yourself - this can be fatal. 
                   Ensure that flexible hoses used with compressed air are properly 
                   terminated, and carefully maintained. Where machinery is in use 
                   arrangements must be made so that a second person is within calling 
                   distance should an emergency arise.  
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      56 
        Section 8: General Laboratory 
        Precautions 
         
        8.1  Personal Protective Equipment 
        The Personal Protective Equipment [PPE] at Work Regulations 1992 require 
        that where PPE is supplied it must have been assessed to ensure it is 
        suitable for the intended purpose. 
         
        The appropriate local regulations should be consulted. In many laboratories 
        the wearing of approved types of laboratory coats and safety spectacles is 
        compulsory. The occupants of the laboratory should ensure that any visitors 
        or tradesmen are similarly attired. In some laboratories additional items of 
        personal protective equipment (e.g. face-shields, dust masks, gloves, plastic 
        aprons, etc.) are also provided; the protection worn must be appropriate to 
        the work being undertaken. 
         
        8.2  Protective Clothing and Footwear 
        Bare skin presents areas for contamination by chemicals, micro-organisms 
        and radioactive substances etc. 
         
        The laboratory coat provides protection for the arms and body. The choice 
        of style and fabric of lab coats provided must be arrived at as a result of 
        risk assessment of the nature and quantities of the hazards involved and the 
        circumstances of use. The Safety Office has issued guidance to assist in 
        making the correct choice which can be found on the Safety office website. 
         
        Laboratory coats may become contaminated with toxic materials and should 
        normally be left behind when leaving the work area. They must not be worn 
        in any area set aside for tea and coffee making or for the consumption of 
        food or beverages. 
         
        They should be washed regularly and whenever they become contaminated 
        with chemicals. 
         
        It is necessary to protect the feet and legs from chemical spillage or from 
        damage from heavy equipment being dropped. Suitable footwear must be 
        worn. The wearing of open-toed shoes or sandals in laboratories is not 
        permitted, as their use makes the feet extremely vulnerable to injury from 
        broken glass, spilt corrosive substances, liquid nitrogen, etc. Loose fitting 
        sandals, especially those with no heel restraint, are not secure and may 
        present a tripping hazard. 
         
        Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                              57 
             Loose long hair can be a danger to personal safety in the laboratory. It is 
             readily ignited (lacquer increases this risk) or it could become trapped in 
             equipment or machinery. Long hair should always be tied back. 
              
             8.3      Protective Gloves 
             Gloves may be required to protect the hands against one or more of a range 
             of  different  hazards,  including  chemical,  biological,  heat,  and  cold.    In 
             general. no one type of glove protects well against more than one type of 
             hazard.  This makes it very important to select the correct type of glove for 
             the intended use. 
              
             Chemical protective gloves are available in a range of materials including 
             natural rubber, neoprene, nitrile, butyl, PVA, PVC and viton. The degree of 
             protection against chemical permeation depends on the glove material, its 
             thickness and the way it is made. Different materials offer widely ranging 
             resistance to permeation as defined by the “breakthrough time”. Glove 
             suppliers provide information to assist in glove selection. It should be 
             remembered that the liquid may be the solvent for other more hazardous 
             chemicals being used and as such will enable these to diffuse through the 
             glove with the solvent, which may also carry the chemical to into the skin.  
              
             Solvents may also adversely affect the physical characteristics of the glove 
             and impair its protective properties, for example by leaching plasticising 
             agents out of the glove causing it to become more brittle, cracking and thus 
             leak. 
              
             It is important to check gloves for damage such as holes, cuts and 
             distortion. Reusable ones should be examined for signs of internal 
             contamination. 
              
             Gloves which bear the term ‘Examination Gloves’ on the box  are intended 
             for use in clinical examinations where the patients are to be protected from 
             contamination by the person examining them.  These are termed Category 1 
             gloves and are suitable only for low risk activities.  In a laboratory setting, 
             their value is very limited, because they offer little or no protection to the 
             wearer against either biological or chemical hazards.  They are of use only 
             in preventing the work from being contaminated by the wearer.   
              
             Category 3 gloves will bear CE mark plus four digits e.g. CE 0121 and will 
             be suitable for protection against biological and chemical hazards for most 
             of the uses in the laboratory.  
              
             The University Safety Office has published more detailed guidance on the 
             selection and use of gloves for protection against hazardous substances.   
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   58 
             Gloves worn in the laboratory must be removed and placed for disposal 
             before leaving the laboratory suite in which such work is being undertaken.  
             The wearing of potentially contaminated gloves in the corridor, rendering 
             others at risk, is strictly forbidden, unless, as a result of risk assessment, 
             the School has sanctioned alternative procedures [e.g. having a glove free 
             hand to negotiate doors]  
              
             The normal requirements on removal of protective clothing prior to entering 
             offices, seminar rooms, rest areas and when entering public areas apply. 
              
             8.4      Allergy to Natural Rubber Latex  
             Latex gloves are widely used to protect against exposure to harmful 
             substances and also to protect work from contamination. Latex allergy is 
             particularly associated with the use of powdered latex gloves – the 
             powder helping to disperse the latex protein, resulting in exposures fifty 
             times higher than arises from non-powdered gloves. The powder used in 
             these gloves can also penetrate the pores of the skin and when combined 
             with sweat produced within the glove this can lead to adverse skin 
             reactions. 
              
             The use of pre-powdered latex gloves is prohibited within the 
             University, because of the risk of these provoking dangerous allergic 
             reactions and skin conditions.  
              
             The use of disposable non powdered latex gloves must be avoided 
             wherever possible and in all cases where there exists a viable and 
             practicable alternative to the use of latex gloves the alternative should be 
             utilised. Their use is only permitted where latex provides a distinct 
             advantage over alternative gloving materials for the task and the 
             justification for selecting latex must be documented in a risk assessment,  
              
             Where latex gloves are used, this must be fully justified, documented and 
             supported by a risk assessment. Users must be provided with information 
             on the risk of latex allergy, information on how to recognise possible allergic 
             reactions to latex and on the need to report suspicion of allergic reactions to 
             the Occupational Health Department.  
              
             Suitable alternative gloves must be provided for users with diagnosed latex 
             allergy. Advice on any additional necessary precautions should be sought 
             from the Occupational Health Department as in more serious cases latex 
             may need to be removed from the entire area.  
             Further and more detailed information is available on the Safety Office 
             website. 
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   59 
             8.5     Hygiene 
             During laboratory work contamination on the hands may not be noticed 
             immediately. Never touch any part of the body (the area around the eyes is 
             especially vulnerable) without washing your hands first. Always wash off any 
             chemical contamination immediately. This includes washing contaminated 
             gloves. If you do contaminate anything (e.g. the bench top or water tap) 
             clean up the contamination immediately. Always wash you hands before 
             leaving the laboratory. 
              
             8.6     Food and Drink 
             Food and drink for human consumption must not be stored, prepared, or 
             consumed in laboratories. Special areas are set aside for the consumption of 
             food or beverages. Where food or drink is required for human consumption 
             under laboratory conditions, i.e. as an authorised research or teaching 
             programme, then special arrangements to ensure the safety of these are 
             required. 
              
             Food and drink along with preparation equipment and eating utensils must 
             be stored and handled separately from chemicals and biologically toxic 
             materials. Separate refrigerators must be provided for the storage of food 
             and drink and laboratory refrigerators should not be used. 
              
             8.7     Smoking 
             Smoking is prohibited in all laboratory areas. 
              
             8.8     Experimental Work 
             Ensure that you are properly briefed, or that you have done your literature 
             work before attempting a new experiment. If you do not fully understand an 
             instruction, are unsure how to operate a piece of equipment, or are unsure 
             about the potential risks of an experiment, then seek help from a competent 
             person before proceeding further. Unauthorised experiments are strictly 
             forbidden. 
              
             It is important that communal work areas and facilities are kept 
             scrupulously clean and tidy. The next person could be injured by the debris 
             or chemicals you have left behind. 
              
             Take care when entering or leaving a laboratory to avoid bumping into 
             someone carrying chemicals or equipment. Never run! Chemicals must be 
             transported in purpose-made carriers; a suitable trolley should be used for 
             transporting other bulky or heavy items. 
              
             8.9     Emergencies 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 60 
            Before starting an experiment you must consider what emergency action to 
            take should it go wrong, or if the apparatus should break. 
             
            When the fire alarm sounds: If practicable make the experiment safe 
            (e.g. turn off heating sources), extinguish naked flames, close windows and 
            doors and follow the local evacuation procedure. 
             
            When starting work in a new area, you should check the location of all fire 
            exit routes, the location of the fire fighting equipment and internal and 
            external telephones. 
             
            8.10    Out of Hours Working 
            Laboratory working by individuals or the unattended operation of 
            experimental apparatus outside of normal hours must be subject to 
            appropriate local regulations and risk assessment. A contact telephone 
            number must be left in case of emergency. 
             
            Leaving experiments unattended should only be done where the risk 
            assessment has identified that this it acceptable and emergency contact and 
            action details must be left on the entrance to the laboratory.  
             
            8.11    Glassware 
            Glassware must always be handled carefully. Glass tubing can easily be 
            broken and can cause severe damage to hands. Protect you hands and use 
            appropriate lubricant when fitting flexible plastic or rubber tubing over glass 
            tubing, or fitting a glass pipette into a safety filler or dispenser. Particular 
            care should be taken when breaking ampoules open. Where the contents 
            are hazardous, e.g. toxic, carcinogenic, infectious, a proprietary ampoule 
            breaker should be used. 
             
            Any crack considerably reduces the strength of glassware, and the item 
            should either be sent for repair before further use, or discarded. Chipped 
            glassware should also be discarded. The appropriate waste disposal 
            methods must be used. 
             
            8.12    Syringes 
            Contaminated or broken syringes and syringe needles must be placed in one 
            of the “Sharp-Safe” containers provided (i.e. a sharps container that 
            complies with BS 7320:1990 and/or type approved under the Carriage of 
            Dangerous Goods (Classification, Packaging and Labelling) Regulations). 
            When full these containers are sent away for incineration. They should not 
            be placed inside other bags. Do not place syringes or other sharps in the 
            general-purpose waste bins. Further information on use is contained in 
            Section 10.5. 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              61 
            8.13    Vacuum Systems and Manometers 
            Glass systems are particularly vulnerable and should be protected against 
            the risk of implosion should mechanical defects develop while the system is 
            under vacuum. Do not evacuate thin-walled or non-spherical glass flasks. 
             
            When liquefied gases are being handled there is a risk of over-pressurising 
            the system, leading to an explosion risk, if valves are not opened and closed 
            at the correct times or in the correct sequence. 
             
            Liquid nitrogen when exposed to the air slowly condenses oxygen, and may 
            assume a pale blue colour. Liquid oxygen presents a severe fire risk and it 
            reacts violently with a range of materials and chemicals. 
             
            Manometers should be protected against damage. Mercury manometers 
            must be provided with a tray to contain all the mercury in the case of any 
            spillage or breakage. Any spillage of mercury must be cleared up 
            immediately and disposed of as hazardous waste. 
             
            8.14    Electrical Equipment 
            Electrical equipment is checked regularly and should normally carry an in-
            date sticker to show this. Out of date equipment should not be used. The 
            guidance contained in the University “Code of Practice for Electrical Safety” 
            should be followed. 
             
            However, faults can occur between checks. Therefore always check before 
            use for damage, loose wires or exposed terminals and for water or solvent 
            spillage. 
             
            Faults must be reported immediately to a competent person and a suitable 
            notice must be attached to the equipment prohibiting further use until 
            repairs are made. 
             
            8.15    Photographic Dark Rooms 
            Because it is often necessary to work with reduced lighting levels it is most 
            important to ensure good housekeeping. Keep floor areas clear and avoid 
            trailing cables. Chemical, electrical and mechanical safety must be carefully 
            considered and it is important to ensure good ventilation. 
             
            8.16    Cryogenic Gases 
            Cryogenic gases in the form of liquid nitrogen and helium are often 
            associated with work in laboratories within the University 
            The properties of these gases are as follows 
             
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              62 
             Property                                      Nitrogen       Helium 
                                                                 
                            1                                    0             0
             Boiling point                                  -196 C         -269 C 
             Liquid /gas ratio 2                              683           739 
                                      3 
             Volume of liquid per m that will              0.14 litre     0.13 litre 
             reduce the oxygen level to 19% 
                                                                                    
             1 
               Temperature at which gas turns to liquid 
             2 
               this is the expansion factor. 1 litre of liquid nitrogen will expand to produce 
             683 litres of gas. 
              
             Hazards associated with the use of these gases are: 
              
             1        Asphyxiation due to oxygen deficiency,  
             Normal atmosphere contains 20.9% oxygen by volume. Increasing the 
             amount of cryogenic gas into the environment will displace the oxygen. The 
             physical effects are increasing pulse rate tiredness, headaches and 
             dizziness, fainting. The severity and speed of onset of these effects increase 
             as the oxygen level decreases and beneath 10-12% they can occur without 
             the person’s knowledge, without prior warning and can prove fatal. The 
             liquid gas ratio indicates the volume that 1 litre of liquid gas will expand to 
             fill when spilt. This happens instantaneously and thus a spill of liquid gas in 
             a poorly ventilated room can have very serious consequences. 
              
             Precautions. Confined spaces present a problem. Store and dispense gas 
             only in well ventilated areas. A risk assessment should have been carried 
             out to establish if the oxygen concentration could drop below 19% in the 
             event of spillage. If this is the case consideration must be given to provision 
             of an oxygen monitoring system for the work area.  
              
             Lifts are confined spaces and cryogenic gases must not be transported in 
             them unless a risk assessment has established that oxygen deficiency will 
             not occur under the conditions and quantities to be used. If oxygen 
             deficiency could occur then the vessel should be unaccompanied. The use of 
             additional personnel and barriers will be required to prevent entry into the 
             lift. These measures should be described in a standard operating procedure. 
             Further advice can be obtained from the Safety Office, which can carry our 
             oxygen monitoring. 
              
             2        Cold burns.  
             Prolonged exposure may lead to frostbite and the destruction of body tissue. 
             This may not be immediate or obvious. Also the skin may freeze instantly to 
             cold surfaces and attempts to remove the skin can cause serious damage. 
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   63 
                   Precautions. The following personal protective equipment should be worn. 
                                
                              Lab coat with apron over top will prevent liquid gas entering 
                               pockets and areas where spillage can collect. 
                              Thermal gloves of non-absorbent waterproof material. They should 
                               be securely banded at the wrist or arm.  
                              Full-face visors must be worn to prevent liquid splashes to eyes, 
                               face and mouth.  
                              Full shoes that extend up the ankle allowing trousers to fit over the 
                               shoe. 
                              Tongs and forceps for handling vials. 
                              First aid response is given in Section 4.4 of this manual. 
                    
                   3           Cold effect on lungs.  Inhalation of cold mists, gases or vapours 
                   can be serious and lung damage may result. This will be a consideration for 
                   larger scale use. Ensure area is well ventilated and wear a face visor. 
                    
                   4           Ice plug formation. These may form in the neck of Dewars when 
                   moisture comes into contact with the cold gas in the neck of the Dewars. 
                   This can then form a seal across the neck preventing normal venting and 
                   leading to increased gas pressure. The ice plug may be ejected at high 
                   velocity or the Dewar may explode.  
                    
                   Precautions 
                        Always fit the Dewar’s protective cap 
                        Ensure the cap is in good condition 
                        Do not leave uncapped Dewars outdoors in moist environments 
                        Ensure Dewars are fully emptied after use 
                   In the event of an ice plug being found in the neck of the Dewar 
                   immediately evacuate the area. 
                    
                   5           Explosion due to rapid expansion.  Due to the high liquid:gas 
                   expansion ratio if liquid cryogen becomes trapped in a confined area or 
                   container can cause the container to explode due to rapid expansion. 
                   Examples of where this can occur: 
                           Removing cryogenic vials from liquid nitrogen – liquid within the vial 
                            can cause the vial to explode as the vial warms up. Always place 
                            vials behind a screen or within a robust container and wear a visor, 
                            or ensure vials are stored only in the vapour phase of the freezer. 
                            Cryogenic liquid becoming trapped between the inner and outer 
                            walls of certain types of dewars which have seals around the rim of 
                            the dewar.  Avoiding use of this type of dewar is strongly advised, 
                            where they are in use it is important to inspect dewars regularly for 
                            any cracks/ breaks in the seal and withdraw from use.  
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      64 
             
            6       Oxygen enrichment.  This may occur around the hose of a 
            pressurised Dewar, or in the bottom of an open Dewar. Since liquid nitrogen 
            and liquid helium are colder than the boiling point of liquid oxygen, air 
            coming into contact with a very cold surface will cause oxygen to condense 
            out of the air. Liquid oxygen may drip from the hose giving the impression 
            of a leak. These effects can result in oxygen-enriched air being formed, 
            which present an additional fire hazard. Also cryogenic liquid oxygen 
            dripping onto surfaces might cause embrittlement. 
             
            Precautions. No smoking or naked flames in the vicinity of cryogenic 
            transfer. 
             
            Solid Carbon Dioxide Ice [Cardice] 
            Cardice will produce carbon dioxide gas, which is an asphyxiant. It is also is 
            extremely cold and can cause cold contact burns. The precautions outlined 
            for the hazards associated with cryogenic gases should be adopted for 
            handling cardice. 
             
            Treatment for cryogenic burns – see section 4.4 
             
            Use of Small Dewars – potential explosion hazard 
             
            It should be noted that the small DILVAC type of dewars can lead to 
            potential problems because of the seal becoming defective and allowing 
            liquid cryogen between the inner and outer layers of the dewar - the rapid 
            expansion as the liquid becomes gaseous can then lead to an explosion. 
            Ideally such dewars should be replaced with ones that do not have a seal 
            around the top. Certain suppliers have dewars that are not constructed in 
            this way because of this potential risk.  
             
            Where the DILVAC style of dewar is still in use, managers must ensure that 
            the seals are inspected for defects and that any that are defective are 
            immediately taken out of use. The best course of action would be to replace 
            any that have seal defects with a different type of dewar, however it is 
            possible for suppliers to provide replacement seals and instructions on how 
            to fit them. 
             
            If this type of dewar remains in use managers must ensure that users are 
            made aware of this potential problem and of the importance of inspecting 
            the seal carefully before each use to ensure it is intact. 
             
            8.17    Use of Personal Communication and Entertainment Devices 
            in Laboratories 
             
            Due to the more hazardous nature of work undertaken in labs and 
            workshops the University has issued guidance to restrict the use  of mobile 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              65 
            phones, personal stereos, mp3 players and i-pods etc. in these areas. More 
            detailed information is available on the Safety Office website. 
            8.18    Transport of Hazardous Substances 
            The transport of hazardous substances by road, rail and air is subject to 
            very specific and complex regulations. . The University has therefore 
            engaged the services of a Dangerous Goods Safety Adviser to provide 
            advice on the correct means of transporting hazardous substances and 
            biological materials. For further details of this service contact the Safety 
            Office.
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              66 
             Section 9: Precautions with 
             Chemicals 
              
             9.1     General Guidance  
             Work with chemicals can present toxicological and/or physical hazards. 
             Where the work could present a toxicological, i.e. health, hazard then it is 
             subject to the requirements of the Control of Substances Hazardous to 
             Health Regulations 2002 (COSHH). Work with substances presenting a 
             flammable or explosion risk are subject to the Dangerous Substances and 
             Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002 (DSEAR).  
              
             Substances defined as being hazardous to health include those that are very 
             toxic, toxic, harmful, corrosive or irritant. These categories of danger are 
             shown on the label of the container for the substance as commercially 
             supplied. There are also a large number of chemicals for which there are 
             occupational exposure limits. These are published in HSE Guidance Note EH 
             40 which is up-dated annually and a copy held in the Safety Office. These 
             chemicals are also subject to COSHH, as would be harmful intermediates or 
             metabolites created during the reaction etc. 
              
             Substances with chronic or delayed effects, for example, carcinogenic, 
             mutagenic, teratogenic or respiratory or skin sensitisation are also subject 
             to these regulations. Again, suppliers have a duty to pass this information 
             on to the user through Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) on first supply. 
             Supplier’s websites usually give access to this information. Links to other 
             MSDS websites are available through the Safety Office website. 
              
             Where substances hazardous to health are used the work needs to be 
             assessed to identify whether there are any stages within it that could result 
             in a harmful exposure. This requires consideration of the toxicity of the 
             material, the quantity involved in relation to this, its physical form (power, 
             in solution, gaseous etc.) and the route by which exposure can occur, i.e. 
             inhalation, ingestion, absorption or via injection or cuts/grazes. Having 
             identified those stages, if any, where a harmful exposure could occur, 
             certain control measures need to be applied. A less or non-hazardous 
             alternative should be used if possible. If not then exposure could be 
             minimised, for example by working in a fume cupboard, using scrubbing 
             devices, using the substance in a safer form (aqueous solution instead of 
             powder) or containment within a sealed vessel. Good general ventilation of 
             the working area is important. Personal protective equipment such as dust 
             masks, gloves, impermeable clothing should only be used where 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 67 
       engineering controls or procedural modifications are either not feasible or 
       only partially effective. 
       Under some circumstances health surveillance by the Occupational Health 
       Unit will be needed. These circumstances are where an adverse health effect 
       may occur as a result of the type of exposures occurring during the work 
       and there is a means of detecting the effect. The main purpose is to identify 
       any exposure-related ill health at an early a stage as possible. Safety Office 
       Guidance details the University's arrangements for providing health 
       surveillance for people whose work may involve a significant exposure to 
       respiratory sensitisers. Some chemicals, metals and natural substances of 
       animal or plant origin may give rise to sensitisation. Natural rubber latex 
       (commonly used for some types of disposable surgical gloves) can also give 
       rise to skin or respiratory sensitisation (see Section 8.4). Further 
       information on Health Surveillance available can be obtained from 
       Occupational Health. 
        
       For some work activities there may be standard procedures to ensure safe 
       working with the chemical. On the other hand there could be situations 
       where each chemical reaction or process requires a unique assessment 
       which should be recorded permanently. In most cases this record should be 
       written into the experimental notebook adjacent to the details of the process 
       undertaken. The School or Departmental arrangements for your work area 
       should be consulted as to which course of action is needed. 
        
       For the hazards associated with particular substances refer to the 
       manufacturer’s hazards data sheets or consult a reference book. 
       `Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials’ by N.I. Sax, `The Registry of 
       Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances’ by R.J. Lewis, `Hazards in the 
       Chemical Laboratory’ edited by S.G. Luxon (5th edition), and the Sigma-
       Aldrich `Library of Chemical Safety Data’ are to be found in the George 
       Green Library. Several Schools have computer database compilations of 
       toxicity data and other reference texts. There are also links from the Safety 
       Office website to websites containing Material Safety Data Sheets.  If it is 
       possible to substitute a hazardous substance with a less hazardous one able 
       to perform the same function, then this substitution must be made. 
        
       All users of chemicals must be adequately trained to be aware of the 
       hazards of the materials they use and the correct precautions to be 
       adopted. If necessary users should seek advice from specialists. For 
       example the hazardous properties of many substances are not readily 
       apparent, and there may be problems of incompatibility when two or more 
       chemicals are mixed.  
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           68 
             The use and storage of all chemicals should be adequately controlled, 
             especially those which are flammable, explosive, toxic or carcinogenic. All 
             containers must be labelled with accurate information as to the contents and 
             where appropriate, with information on the hazards. The minimum quantity 
             necessary should be used and hazardous materials should be safely 
             disposed of as soon as possible after use. See Safety Office guidance on the 
             safe storage of chemicals and guidance on working with hazardous 
             substances. 
              
             Before carrying out an experiment with an unfamiliar and potentially 
             hazardous chemical, plans should be made to deal with any emergency 
             arising from unexpected releases of materials by spillage or other means. 
             For example, spill kits containing neutralising substances should be available 
             and if appropriate suitable chemically resistant suits and overshoes. Where 
             corrosive/toxic vapours could be released respiratory protective equipment 
             and staff trained in its use should be made available.  Breathing apparatus 
             will only be appropriate where there is a rigorous regime of trained 
             operators, maintenance and face fit testing is in place. 
               
             When carrying out any chemical manipulation always have someone within 
             easy calling distance who can render assistance or aid in case of accident. 
             Potentially hazardous operations by lone workers are not allowed. 
              
             Further information on chemical safety is available on the Safety Office 
             website. There is also guidance on nano-materials. 
              
             Specific Guidance 
             9.2     Fume Cupboards 
             Fume cupboards provide one of the most important controls over exposure 
             to hazardous substances. They can also provide protection against physical 
             hazards. There should be clear indication of the purpose for which a fume 
             cupboard may or may not be used. Users of fume cupboards must always 
             match the work being undertaken to the suitability of the cupboard 
             concerned. There must be a system for regularly monitoring the effective 
             operation of fume cupboards. 
              
             Fumecupboards must provide effective containment of the fumes/vapours 
             etc. This is achieved through selecting a suitable face velocity for the 
             fumecupboard and the type of work and careful use of the cupboard. 
                    Standard hazard work should be carried out in fumecupboards with 
                     a face velocity of 0.4 m/s, 
                    Storage only is permitted in fumecupboards with a face velocity 
                     exceeding 0.2 m/s. 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 69 
                              High hazard work might require an increased face velocity and/or a 
                               fumecupboard with an emission scrubbing system, usually a wet 
                               wash.  
                   Poor housekeeping or layout of equipment in the fumecupboard can 
                   significantly reduce the effectiveness of containment. In particular ensure 
                   that: 
                              The fumecupboard is working - check the airflow indicator and/or 
                               use an anemometer. A simple tell-tail (strip of paper to deflect with 
                               the air movement) can also be useful! 
                              Do not overload the fume cupboard 
                                     o     Leave a 150mm clear space at the front – “Safety Line” 
                                     o     Do not obstruct the air slots at the base of the back for 
                                           the fume cupboard. 
                              Always lower the sash when not working at it. 
                              Don’t leave or trail things over the sill – this can cause leakage out. 
                    
                   The Engineer’s section of the Estate Office maintains a register of all fume 
                   cupboards and arranges for them to be examined and tested every 12-14 
                   months. Copies of the result from this are held both by the School 
                   concerned and the Estate Office. 
                    
                   A considerable number and variety of chemical compounds should only ever 
                   be used inside an efficient fume cupboard; benzene and carbon tetrachloride 
                   are but two examples. You must always be aware of the hazardous 
                   properties of the compounds you are using so that risk of exposure can be 
                   estimated. If the hazards are unknown, then a fume cupboard should be 
                   used. 
                    
                   9.3         Skin Hazards 
                   Acids, alkalis and other corrosive materials can cause burns on the skin. 
                   Some chemicals have an irritating action and may cause sensitisation or 
                   dermatitis, while some others pass freely through the skin barrier and 
                   thereby directly into the blood stream. Toxic effects can be almost 
                   immediate, but frequently effects are delayed or may result from long-term 
                   exposure. Some chemicals are carcinogenic. It is prudent therefore to keep 
                   all chemicals off the skin. 
                    
                   Always wear the approved personal protection 
                    
                   (i.e. safety glasses, laboratory coat and sensible stout shoes and keep bare 
                   legs covered). Rubber or plastic gloves should be worn when handling 
                   chemicals, and in cases where there is a risk of splashing then face shields, 
                   plastic aprons and rubber boots may be necessary. 
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      70 
             You should be aware of the best method for dealing with accidental skin 
             contact before using a chemical. In many cases the remedial action involves 
             immediate and thorough washing and prolonged rinsing with water and, if in 
             doubt, then this procedure should be used. However, many chemicals are 
             not particularly soluble in water and alternative methods for removal are 
             often necessary (e.g. soap and water may suffice). Unless you have 
             information to the contrary, avoid the use of organic solvents for the 
             washing process since some of them have the ability to carry contaminants 
             through the skin. 
              
             9.4     Eye Hazards 
             It must be assumed that all chemicals will cause damage if allowed to 
             contact the sensitive surface of the eye. Some chemicals have a severe 
             damaging effect, especially acids, alkalis and those chemicals, which are 
             classified as corrosive or as irritants. Many solvents fall into this category. 
             Hence, the wearing of safety spectacles or other appropriate and 
             approved eye protection in laboratories is essential when handling 
             chemical compounds.  
              
             9.5     Pesticides 
             The Control of Pesticides Regulations (1986) require that any person who 
             uses a pesticide shall take all reasonable precautions so as to protect the 
             health of human beings, creatures and plants, and to safeguard the 
             environment and in particular to avoid pollution of water. Trained personnel 
             with a certificate of competence should use pesticides approved for 
             agricultural purposes. Untrained personnel may only use pesticides under 
             the direct supervision of such a person. Further guidance is given in a Code 
             of Practice on the Agricultural and Horticultural use of Pesticides, which 
             includes sections on operator training, storage and transport of pesticides, 
             and the safe use of pesticides. 
              
             Local rules should outline appropriate systems of work which users 
             must observe. 
              
             9.6     Risk of Poisoning - Planning for Emergencies 
             In all work involving the risk of poisoning it is particularly important that a 
             comprehensive assessment is made under the COSHH Regulations before 
             work starts. Very careful consideration must be given to the apparatus 
             design and engineering controls so that the risk is minimised. 
             Particular chemical poisons may have a specific antidote. If there is one 
             which may be administered by lay persons it should be made readily 
             available beside the experiment. 
              
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 71 
             If the treatment must be administered by medically trained personnel, make 
             arrangements with the University Health Centre to have the recommended 
             emergency treatment kit readily available for immediate use. 
              
             9.7     Personal Hygiene 
             All chemicals should be regarded as toxic by ingestion. Hence, pipetting 
             liquids or solutions by mouth is strictly prohibited; use a pipette 
             pump, syringe or a mechanical dispenser. Never deliberately taste, swallow 
             or inhale any chemical. 
              
             Chemicals can also enter the body through the skin absorption or through 
             the accidental inhalation of vapours or dusts. Suitable protective equipment 
             must be worn when handling chemicals. Cuts and wounds are particularly 
             vulnerable and may allow direct entry of chemical substances into the 
             bloodstream. Broken skin should be covered with a suitable dressing, but if 
             the wound is on the hand then the dressing should be waterproof and 
             rubber gloves must be worn while handling chemicals. 
              
             Always wash your hands before touching other parts of your body 
             (especially the area around the eyes) or before taking food. 
              
             Do not smoke, eat or drink in the presence of chemicals. 
              
             9.8     Flammable Liquids, Vapours or Gases 
             The majority of organic materials are flammable, and many organic solvents 
             are highly flammable (e.g. alcohol, acetone, ether, petroleum products, and 
             toluene—to name just a few). The quantity of any highly flammable liquid 
             present in a work area must be as small as is reasonably practicable having 
             regard to the processes or operations being carried out. 
              
             The Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002 
             (DSEAR) define the controls for fire and explosion risks associated with 
             working with flammable materials. They are concerned with fire and 
             explosion risks from substances or preparations that may be hazardous due 
             to the potential to give rise to fire, explosion or other similar event. The 
             following classes of substances are covered: 
                    oxidising;  
                    extremely flammable;  
                    highly flammable; or  
                    flammable. 
              
             These "Dangerous Substances" may give rise to fire or explosion in the form 
             of gases, vapours, mists and dusts. The following controls are required: 
                  Risk assessment 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 72 
                          Elimination or reduction of risks 
                          Identification, classification and signing of areas where an explosive 
                        atmosphere may be produced, (zoning of areas according to specified 
                        criteria for the potential for forming a hazardous atmosphere and 
                        selection of appropriate equipment that will not ignite it for use in the 
                        zones),   
                          Preparation of accident, incident and emergency arrangements, 
                          Provision of information, instruction and training, 
                          Identification and marking of containers and pipes containing 
                        dangerous substances. 
                    
                   This approach, i.e. the requirement for risk assessment is consistent with 
                   other recent health and safety legislation. To focus on the aspects required 
                   by DSEAR, please refer to University guidance which includes specific forms 
                   for the purpose of carrying out and recording a suitable DSEAR risk 
                   assessment.  
                    
                   Risk of fire or explosion 
                   The risk assessment should consider how the substance could be released 
                   and the likelihood of it igniting under normal use, maintenance, and 
                   forseeable accident. The quantity, form and duration of the release are 
                   significant, for example whether a sufficient quantity or concentration to 
                   sustain a fire or explosion could be involved. Whether a release could be 
                   ignited will depend upon proximity to ignition sources such as standard, 
                   unprotected electrical equipment and switches that could produce a spark, 
                   naked flames, hot surfaces and sparks from grinding and cutting processes. 
                    
                    
                   Control measures 
                   Controls to prevent fire/explosion from occurring include correct design, 
                   selection and maintenance of the equipment and protective devices.  
                   Containers and pipework must be marked as to contents.  Substitution of 
                   dangerous substances for a less dangerous alternative should be 
                   considered. Reduction of quantities used or stored. Avoidance of release of 
                   substance by using sealed systems. Preventing explosive atmospheres from 
                   developing by means of ventilation. Removing sources of ignition. 
                   Separation of potentially reactive materials. 
                    
                   For flammable gas systems, installation in accordance with British 
                   Compressed Gases Association Codes of Practice would meet the physical 
                   requirements of these regulations - inert gases would not be covered by 
                   these regulations.  
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                       73 
              Those working with flammable liquids should also be aware of the existing 
              guidelines within the following HSE documents: 
              *    HSG 140 - safe handling and use of flammable liquids  
              *    HSG 51 - storage in containers – limit of 1/2 days supply or 50 litres in 
                metal cabinet in any workplace. 
               
              Flammable liquids must be kept in securely lidded and labelled containers. 
              When moved they should be carried in a manner to prevent breakage or 
              spillage, for example enclosed Winchester carriers. 
               
              When decanting from drums, the drum and the receptacle must be earthed 
              to prevent static build up – discharge of this is likely to ignite the liquid. 
               
              Solvents that need to be stored at low temperatures must be kept in 
              purpose built spark-free refrigerators, not the usual domestic type. In the 
              event of a solvent fire, water should not be used to fight it. Burning solvent 
              usually floats on water and dousing with water can rapidly increase the 
              spread of the fire!  
               
              Mixtures of flammable organic materials (whether gases, solvent vapours or 
              dusts) and air may explode on ignition. To avoid this the proportion of 
              flammable gas, vapour or dust in the air should be kept to a very low level 
              by adopting safe working practices, giving careful thought to apparatus 
              design, and by maintaining good ventilation, for example by working in a 
              fumecupboard. The vicinity should be kept clear of ignition sources (e.g. 
              flames, hot surfaces or sparks). 
               
              Zoning 
              The regulations also specify criteria for the classification of hazardous zones 
              on the basis of the frequency and duration that an explosive atmosphere of 
              vapours, gases, mists or dusts may occur. Equipment for use in such zones 
              must be selected on the basis of the requirements set out in the Equipment 
              and Protective Systems Intended for use in Potentially Explosive 
              Atmospheres regulations 1996, which correlate design specification with the 
              zone of intended use. Where assessment has identified such a zone, these 
              should be clearly signed. 
               
              Spillages 
              Minor spillages must be cleaned up quickly. In the event of major spillages 
              the laboratory should be ventilated by opening the windows, evacuated and 
              the door closed. Do not switch any electrical equipment on or off since this 
              could cause a flashback to the spillage. 
               
               
              Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                     74 
             Please note the following: 
             1) The DSEAR Regulations repeal the Highly Flammable Liquids and 
               Liquefied Petroleum Gases Regulations 1972, which previously required 
               controls on storage and use of these types of flammable substances. 
             2) The Petroleum Consolidation Act 1928 is amended to remove the 
               requirement to licence certain types of solvent stores – licensing now only 
               applies to storage of petroleum spirit in tanks for pumping to supply tanks 
               of internal combustion engines. 
              
             9.9      Carcinogen, Mutagens and Substances Toxic to Reproduction 
             There are specific requirements under the COSHH Regulations concerning 
             working with carcinogens. 
              
             Carcinogens are identifiable by the risk phrases R 45 "may cause cancer" 
             or R49 "may cause cancer by inhalation" and fall into three categories 
             Carcinogens are divided into three categories: 
              
                 Category 1 - substances known to be carcinogenic to humans. There is 
                  sufficient evidence to establish a causal association between human 
                  exposure to the substance and the development of cancer. 
                 Category 2 - substances that should be regarded as if they are 
                  carcinogenic to humans, for which there is sufficient evidence, based on 
                  long-term animal studies and other relevant information, to provide a 
                  strong presumption that human exposure may result in the 
                  development of cancer.  
                 Category 3 - substances that cause concern owing to possible 
                  carcinogenic effects but for which available information is not adequate 
                  to make satisfactory assessments. 
              
             Categories 1 and 2, if purchased from a supplier, will carry the "toxic" (T) 
             symbol and the Risk Phrase R45 (May cause cancer) or R49 (May cause 
             cancer by inhalation). These are subject to specific control under COSHH. 
              
             Category 3, if purchased from a supplier, carries the "harmful" (Xn) 
             symbol and the Risk Phrase R40 (Limited evidence of carcinogenic 
             effect). These are not included in the COSHH definition of a carcinogen but 
             are subject to the general requirements of COSHH.  
              
             Mutagens are substances that cause heritable genetic changes (mutations). 
             Most mutations are harmful and most mutagens are carcinogens and vice 
             versa. Substances that are known to impair fertility or to cause 
             developmental toxicity in humans are defined as toxic to reproduction. 
             (STR). This definition covers a broader range of health effects than the 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   75 
                   earlier "teratogenic" which applied only to substances that adversely 
                   affected the developing foetus.  
                    
                   Mutagens and STRs are classified similarly to carcinogens in Categories 1 to 
                   3. 
                    
                        Category 1 and 2 mutagens carry the Risk Phrase R46 "May cause 
                         heritable genetic damage" and substances toxic to reproduction carry 
                         the Phrase R60 "May impair fertility" or R61 "May cause harm to the 
                         unborn child".  
                        Category 3 mutagens have the Risk Phrase " Possible risk of irreversible 
                         effects" and Category 3 substances toxic to reproduction are classified 
                         by R62 "Possible risk of impaired fertility" or R63 "Possible risk of harm 
                         to the unborn child". 
                    
                   These substances, unlike carcinogens, are not specifically prescribed in 
                   COSSH. However because of the nature of the hazard, workers should adopt 
                   the precautions and principles outlined in this section. 
                    
                   As with any other chemical, a risk assessment must be carried out for the 
                   procedure involving the use of a carcinogen. The risk assessment must 
                   identify the means by which exposure can be prevented or if not 
                   reasonably practicable controlled. 
                    
                   Prevention of exposure can be achieved through substituting with a less 
                   harmful substance, modifying the process to avoid using the carcinogen, or 
                   avoiding the formation of carcinogenic by-products or intermediates. Where 
                   this is not reasonably practicable the first choice must be the use of a totally 
                   enclosed system such as a glove box or cytotoxic cabinet. 
                    
                   If prevention cannot be achieved then exposure should be controlled 
                   through the use of partial enclosure and/or local exhaust ventilation along 
                   with safe handling systems, the general principles of which include: 
                    
                        Handling must be confined to dedicated areas that are clearly identified 
                         with appropriate hazard signs and non-essential personnel excluded 
                         from these areas.  
                        Minimise the quantity to be used and or frequency of exposure. 
                        Try to avoid having to dispense powder by purchasing the carcinogen in 
                         pre-weighed vials/iso-vac containers. 
                        If the compound is stable in solution then weigh out enough for several 
                         experiments and divide into suitable aliquots for future use. 
                        Work in an enclosed glove box or if not available use a fume cupboard 
                         or powder weighing cabinet. 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      76 
                        Always work over a tray. 
                        If working in a fume cupboard be aware of air turbulence as this can 
                         spread fine powders within the fume cupboard.  
                        If weighing fine powders be aware of static and try to reduce it by 
                         rinsing gloves first under water or using an earth strap. 
                    
                   Personal protective equipment may be used as secondary protection but 
                   must never be the primary means of controlling exposure.  
                    
                        Lab coat should be double fronted, side fastening with cuffs. 
                        Gloves should be of the correct type depending on the nature of the 
                         compound and any associated solvent that may be involved. Check 
                         glove manufacturers charts or seek advice. 
                        Respiratory protection [RPE] such as face masks may only be worn as a 
                         secondary means of protection in addition to working in a fume 
                         cupboard or in the event of a spill outside primary containment. RPE 
                         must be of the correct type and, depending on type, may require face 
                         fit testing. 
                    
                   Individuals required to work with carcinogens must be fully trained in how 
                   to handle carcinogens safely and be assessed as fully competent by their 
                   supervisor before handling the carcinogen. This training will be recorded. 
                   A very high level of supervision should also be maintained to ensure that 
                   workplace standards and working practices are maintained. 
                    
                   Storage & Transport 
                   Keep storage of carcinogenic substances to a minimum. Containers and 
                   storage areas must be clearly labelled with appropriate hazard signs and 
                   kept locked. 
                    
                   Transport in double containers that are clearly labelled as to hazard. 
                    
                   9.10        Nano-materials 
                   Nano particles are usually defined as having one or more external 
                   dimensions in the order of 100 nm or less i.e.: < 0.1 micrometre / micron. A 
                   precautionary approach is advised when using nano-materials. In particular, 
                   there are concerns due to: 
                         1.    The small size of nanoparticles means that they could reach parts 
                               of biological systems that are not normally accessible by other 
                               larger particles. This process is known as translocation and in 
                               general, nanoparticles can translocate much more easily than other 
                               larger particles for example by: 
                                    the increased possibility of crossing cell boundaries, 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      77 
                                    passing directly from the lungs into the blood stream and so on 
                                     to all of the organs in the body,  
                                    through deposition in the nose, directly to the brain, or 
                                    through skin absorption or penetration.  
                         2.    Due to their small size nanoparticles have a relatively much higher 
                               surface area than the same mass of larger particles. If surface area 
                               is a driver for toxicity this can result in potentially increased toxic 
                               effects.  
                                
                         3.    If the rationale for developing nano-materials and nanoparticles is 
                               that they will have new and different properties than larger 
                               particles of the same material then it is conceivable that these new 
                               properties could include increased toxicity.  
                    
                   It must be noted that there are currently no Work Place Exposure Limits 
                   specifically for nano particles. The information contained within the Material 
                   Safety Data Sheet [MSDS] for a substance in conventional micron size, 
                   cannot be regarded as relevant for the same substance in the nano range. 
                    
                   Risk Assessment 
                   For nanomaterials the primary concern will be the health effects due to 
                   inhalation, skin contact or ingestion. However consideration must also be 
                   given to fire and explosion risk and control measures that may be required 
                   under DSEAR. In carrying out the risk assessment and identifying 
                   appropriate risk control strategies the precautionary approach must be 
                   followed where the hazard of the nanomaterial is unknown:  
                              Consider the form and minimise / avoid generation or manipulation 
                               of free nano powders or aerosols of solutions containing nano 
                               materials. 
                              Otherwise employ suitable local exhaust ventilation (e.g. 
                               MSC/glove box), potentially HEPA filtering if determined by risk 
                               assessment. 
                              Minimise the quantities handled/manipulated, the frequency and 
                               duration of use/handling and the number of workers involved. 
                              Use handling methods that minimise the chance of the material 
                               becoming airborne (e.g. damping down). 
                              Employ suitable personal protective equipment: 
                                     o     Category 3 gloves, 2 layers 
                                     o     Appropriate respiratory protective equipment 
                                     o     Clothing that does not allow dust penetration (e.g. Tyvek) 
                   For further information see: Guidance and Safety Requirements for the 
                   Creation and Manipulation of Engineered Nano Materials. 
                    
                   9.11         Disposal of Waste Chemicals 
                   Great care must be taken when disposing of potentially hazardous material. 
                   The appropriate waste disposal methods must be used as given in local 
                   waste disposal procedures. 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      78 
              
             Only innocuous materials may be disposed of via dustbins or drains. It may 
             sometimes be possible to use a chemical deactivating process, as for 
             example outlined in the Aldrich Chemical Company catalogue. Any such 
             deactivation process must have undergone suitable and sufficient risk 
             assessment to ensure that unnecessary risks are not introduced.  
              
             The disposal of hazardous substances is subject to a legal “Duty of Care” 
             under the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and is also subject to the 
             Hazardous Waste Regulations. Waste must be appropriately segregated, 
             collected in suitable containers and correctly labelled as to contents.  
              
             The University has an Environmental Manager who works within the Estates 
             Office who can provide advice and guidance on waste disposal procedures.  
             The Environment section of the Estates Office website contains more 
             detailed information on the University’s arrangements for disposal of 
             hazardous waste.  
              
             The University has approved a number of licensed waste contractors who 
             must be used for the disposal of hazardous waste. These are listed on the 
             Safety Office website. 
                      
             9.12    Restricted Chemicals 
             Certain classes of chemicals are subject to specific licensing controls due to 
             the potential for misuse.  
             1.      Some chemicals that can be used for illicit manufacture of narcotic 
                     or psychotropic drugs (drug precursor substances) are subject to 
                     Home Office licensing. The licences are chargeable and are specific 
                     to the research area. The arrangements for working with these 
                     materials are summarised on the Safety Office website. 
             2.      Production, use or possession of chemicals that are agents 
                     associated with chemical warfare are subject to licensing controls 
                     under the Chemicals Weapons Act 1996 via the Department of 
                     Energy and Climate Change.  Any quantity of, or intention of work 
                     with, a schedule 1 substance must be notified to the Safety Office 
                     for approval against any licence held or to be applied for. Approval 
                     is based on adequate risk assessment, written safe operating 
                     procedures and training records, and suitable facilities including 
                     security for the material and the disposal of waste. For Schedule 2 
                     and 3 substances schools are required to provide an annual 
                     retrospective notification to the Safety Office via a local designated 
                     person. The Safety Office will submit the annual statutory 
                     declaration.  
             3.      Part 7 of the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 places 
                     requirements on the security of pathogens and toxins in response 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                               79 
                    to heightened concerns over potential terrorist threats. These 
                    regulations are overseen by the Home Office and enforced by the 
                    Police. The purpose of the regulations is to enable checks to be 
                    made on the physical security and access by individuals to specified 
                    more dangerous pathogens, toxins and related genetic material. 
                    Premises holding stocks of any of the prescribed materials are 
                    required to be notified to the Home Office. The Safety Office 
                    submits such notifications on behalf of the University.  Further 
                    guidance on the security of pathogens and toxins is published on 
                    the Safety Office website. 
                     
            9.13    Uranium and Thorium and their Compounds 
                    These elements have non-radioactive uses but are subject to 
                    regulation and annual notification of holdings to regulatory 
                    authorities. There are also aggregate limits of holding for each site 
                    of the elemental and compound forms of these. 
                     
                    Local records of holdings must be maintained and notified to the 
                    Safety Office to enable annual statutory notifications to be made.  
             
            9.14     Respirable crystalline silica [see Section 6.20]
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              80 
             Section 10: Precautions with 
             Biological Materials 
             10.1    General 
             Biological materials present a range of hazards, which include infection, 
             sensitisation and environmental damage. There are a number of regulations 
             relating to the control of these hazards and these are supported by a large 
             quantity of guidance. 
             The most important legislation in relation to the use of biological material is 
             the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 (COSHH) 
             which provide the major framework for control of the hazards. Biological 
             agents and other biological materials that are hazardous to health need 
             consideration under these regulations. (Safety Office Guidance describes 
             how the biological agent's provisions of these regulations should be 
             implemented.) Where any work with these could lead to harmful exposures 
             the risks should be anticipated and controlled by a mixture of engineering 
             and procedural means.  
             Biological Agents include the general class of micro-organisms [virus, 
             bacteria, fungi, yeast etc], cell cultures and human endoparasites and have 
             been classified into four hazard groups. These are shown below, with some 
             possible examples which you may encounter in your work.     
             Group 1         Unlikely to cause human disease. E.g. Tissues and cell lines 
                             of non primate/non human origin.  Human/primate cell lines 
                             that are long established and have long history of safe use 
                             [e.g. HeLa cells] Disabled/attenuated/non-pathogenic strains 
                             of some bacteria and virus. 
             Group 2         Can cause human disease and may be a hazards to 
                             employees; it is unlikely to spread to the community and 
                             there is usually effective prophylaxis or treatment available. 
                             E.g. tissues and primary cell lines of human/primate origin. 
                             Adenovirus, clostridium, most strains of E coli 
             Group 3         Can cause severe human disease and may be a serious 
                             hazard to employees; it may spread to the community, but 
                             there is usually effective prophylaxis or treatment available. 
                             HIV, Hepatitis B, E coli 0157, salmonella typhi. 
             Group 4         Causes severe human disease and may be a serious hazard 
                             to employees; it is likely to spread to the community, and 
                             there is no effective prophylaxis or treatment available. E.g. 
                             Rabies, Ebola Virus but it is highly unlikely that any such 
                             agents would be permitted in the University 
             Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                 81 
            10.2    Notification Requirements 
            The Safety Office must be notified of any new work involving any Hazard 
            Group 3 biological agents. Individuals working intentionally with Group 3 (or 
            above) biological agents will have a personal record sheet completed in 
            respect of their work activities with these agents. The record sheet should 
            be kept locally within the School and updated as necessary with the 
            information copied to Occupational Health. This will be kept for at least 10 
            years following cessation of work with the biological agents. Schools will be 
            responsible for ensuring the long-term storage for these records. 
            In addition to the above, the Anti-terrorism. Crime & Security Act 2001 
            requires the University to notify the Home Office of its holdings of certain 
            hazardous biological agents and toxins. A list of these agents and more 
            details of the requirements of this legislation can be found in Safety Office 
            Guidance. Where an individual intends to import or export any item 
            contained on this list the prior approval and consent of the Safety Office will 
            be required. 
            10.3    Information and Sources of Guidance 
            There are several important documents which give very helpful guidance on 
            the hazard associated with biological agents and how to control the risk: 
            These are listed below and can be accessed via the HSE Biosafety Resources 
            pages.  
               Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 and 
                associated Approved Code of Practice for Biological Agents. 
               Scientific Advisory Committee for Genetic Modification - Compendium of 
                Guidance  
             
               Genetically Modified Organisms (Contained Use) Regulations 2003  
             
               The management, design and operation of microbiological containment 
                laboratories [ACDP 2001 , ISBN 0717620344] 
             
               Biological agents: Managing the risks in laboratories and healthcare 
                premises. 
                 
               University information on work with Biological Agents and Genetically 
                Modified Organisms. 
             
               Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy Agents: Safe Working and 
                the Prevention of Infection.   
             
            10.4    Risks Associated with work with Biological Agents. 
            The main risk associated with working with biological agents is the potential 
            for infection. There are three main potential routes of infection to be aware 
            of. 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              82 
            Inhalation - for example breathing in a fine aerosol or vapour mist which 
            may contain a viable organism  
            Ingestion - through poor hygiene practice, mouth pipetting, [this should 
            never be done] or eating/drinking in a lab area 
            Skin penetration - This could be as a result of injury with a contaminated 
            sharp object, contact with mucous membrane of eyes/nose/mouth or entry 
            via an uncovered wound. 
            10.5    Ways to control risks. 
            Detailed information on how to control risk is contained local School Codes 
            of Practice and in departmental/school procedural risk assessments. These 
            should be made available to you by your supervisor, make sure you read 
            them and apply the controls specified in them. The following is intended as a 
            brief guide on the control measures that should be applied when working 
            with biological materials. 
               Avoid the production of aerosols - if this is not possible then contain 
                the process e.g. use of a microbiological safety cabinet and sealed 
                centrifuge buckets. 
               Safe use of sharps.  Avoid use of needles and scalpels and wherever 
                possible use plastic items instead of glass. If this is not possible do not 
                pass needles/scalpels, directly from hand to hand, do not re-sheath 
                needles by hand, dispose of sharps at point of use directly into an 
                approved sharps container. Sharps containers must not be overfilled or 
                left in public/general circulation areas and should be disposed of in 
                accordance with local procedures. Sharps injuries must be dealt with in 
                accordance with those outlined in Section 4 of the handbook. Do not 
                pick up broken, potentially contaminated glass by hand, use forceps or 
                tongs. 
               Wear gloves to protect hands and make sure that all cuts are covered 
                with waterproof dressing. If you develop skin lesions or eczema report 
                this immediately to Occupational Health. Remove before leaving the 
                laboratory and wash hands. 
               Wear a side fastening lab coat with knitted cuffs - remove before 
                leaving lab to enter other 'clean areas'. 
               Avoid hand to mouth contact. No eating drinking, smoking or 
                application of cosmetics in lab areas. Wash hands frequently and always 
                before leaving the lab. 
               Vaccination & Immunisation. It is recommended that any potential 
                worker be successfully immunised against hepatitis B before 
                commencing work with human/primate samples.  Immunisation may 
                also be appropriate for work with other organisms. ACDP guidance 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              83 
                         document [10.3.1 above] identifies these, Health surveillance and 
                         immunisation can be arranged through Occupational Health at Cripps 
                         Health Centre by completing the relevant form.  
                        Training and supervision are essential requirement for safe working 
                         with micro-organisms. Training should cover the hazards of the work 
                         and the practical use of special procedures, techniques and equipment 
                         that are needed to minimise the risks. Ancillary and cleaning staff 
                         should be instructed in safety procedures in so far as the hazards of the 
                         work area could affect them. An appropriate level of supervision must 
                         be maintained. 
                        Waste Treatment. All biohazard/clinical waste must be rendered safe 
                         to handle before leaving the laboratory. It should be clearly identifiable 
                         as to the type of waste and the originating location and disposed of via 
                         the appropriate route. Further information is contained in in Code of 
                         Practice for Work with Biological Agents and Genetically Modified 
                         Organisms. 
                   10.6 Guidance on Other Biological Hazards 
                   10.6.1  Genetic Modification.  
                   Genetic modification includes any introduction of genetic material into 
                   organisms and micro-organisms and the subsequent use of the modified 
                   organism. These activities are regulated by the Genetically Modified 
                   Organisms (Contained Use) Regulations 2000. The release of genetically 
                   modified organisms is covered separately by the Genetically Modified 
                   Organisms (Deliberate Release) Regulations 1992. 
                   The University’s arrangements for securing compliance with these 
                   Regulations can be found via the Safety Office website.  
                   The key requirements for Schools engaged in or wishing to engage in work 
                   with genetically modified organisms are: 
                        Appointing a  Biological Safety Officer and  
                        Establishing a link with one of the University Genetic Modification Safety 
                         Committees [GMSC] for approval and monitoring of the work. The 
                         University Biological Safety Adviser will advise on the appropriate 
                         GMSC.  
                        Assessment of risks to humans and the environment must be made on 
                         the appropriate GM assessment form and this must be submitted for 
                         approval by the relevant GMSC.  Details and assessment form are in 
                         the above policy document.  
                   The Safety Office must approve local arrangements for controlling work 
                   involving genetic modification.  
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      84 
                   Some types of high risk/high category or release work require that the HSE 
                   be notified of the work in advance, and that they approve the work and the 
                   containment facilities. 
                   The HSE has published an extensive “Compendium of Guidance”, which 
                   describes in detail the controls required and the relevant laboratory 
                   standards. This is available from the HSE website. The control measures 
                   shown in 10.5 above also apply to work with genetically modified material. 
                   10.6.2  Biological Sensitising Agents 
                   A number of biological materials are powerful sensitising agents the 
                   commonest being  
                        urine and dander from laboratory animals – for more detail see 10.5 
                         below 
                        dust from locusts and flour,  
                        grain and hay associated with handling, milling and malting grain and 
                         baking.  
                        Natural rubber latex – see Section 8.4 for information. 
                   Other biological substances known to cause respiratory sensitisation include 
                   antibiotics, proteolytic enzymes, dusts from castor bean, green coffee bean, 
                   guar gum, soybean and tea. 
                   Exposure can in some individuals cause rhinitis and conjunctivitis with the 
                   symptoms of hay fever, i.e. runny or stuffy nose and watery or prickly eyes. 
                   A dry cough can occasionally occur. Continued exposure to the agent after 
                   developing these symptoms can lead to asthma— periodic attacks of 
                   wheezing, chest tightness and breathlessness resulting from constriction of 
                   the airways. 
                   The symptoms are substance specific and may occur after a latent period of 
                   months or years. Removal from exposure to the agent alleviates the 
                   symptoms but the sensitisation is permanent. 
                   Ways to minimise exposure 
                   The aforementioned COSHH regulations require that, as far as reasonably 
                   practicable, exposure is either prevented or kept to a minimum. The best 
                   way to achieve this level of control is to enclose the process in some way 
                   with the addition of local exhaust ventilation, such as a fume cupboard or 
                   powder booth. In animal facilities a degree of control is also afforded by 
                   having a very high standard of ventilation in areas where allergens may be 
                   present. However it is usually necessary to supplement these measures by 
                   wearing some form of respiratory protective equipment [RPE], such as a 
                   facemask, in addition to protective clothing and gloves. If the local risk 
                   assessment requires that RPE be worn to protect against exposure the 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      85 
       individual should be consulted and involved in its choice and be face fit 
       tested and trained in how to attain the best fit so that it provides maximum 
       protection.  It is then incumbent upon the individual to make sure that 
       he/she wears is correctly and reports any defects. Further information on 
       RPE can be found via the Safety Office website.   
       Additional information and help with the selection of RPE can be found at the 
       Healthy Working Lives website. 
       Health Surveillance 
       Work with biological sensitising agents may require that the individuals 
       exposed be subjected to health surveillance by Occupational Health. 
       University guidance summarises the health surveillance currently provided 
       by OH. 
       Should an individual experience any of the symptoms outlined above they 
       must immediately report this to their supervisor or manager who will 
       arrange for them to attend the OHU. 
       10.6.3  Mammals and Higher Vertebrate Animals 
       Animals in the University are kept in areas licensed by the Home Office and 
       to which authorised persons only have access.  
       All persons working with laboratory animals, with the exception of 
       undergraduate students involved in work of less than 6 weeks duration, will 
       be subject to health surveillance by Occupational Health. Other staff who 
       need to routinely enter animal houses, e.g. maintenance and cleaning, will 
       also be subject to this. Health surveillance will comprise both pre-
       employment screening and periodic surveillance. Initial screening, with 
       follow-ups at six weeks and  twelve weeks and  will be carried out by 
       Occupational Health.  Periodic screening will entail an annual check-up by 
       Occupational Health, spirometry and the completion of a confidential 
       questionnaire which will be included into the person’s health record. 
       Permission to work with laboratory animals will be refused or withdrawn in 
       the event of the person’s non-compliance with this policy. Safety Office 
       Guidance describes the health surveillance arrangements and includes at 
       Appendix 3 a summary of the condition known as “allergy to laboratory 
       animals”. (All new workers should be made aware of this condition). 
       In addition to the risk of sensitisation [10.6.2], a further risk which should 
       be considered is that of zoonoses, i.e. infections which can be transmitted 
       from animals to humans. Examples include ringworm, orf, leptospirosis, 
       psittacosis and brucellosis. Where possible careful stock selection or possibly 
       treatment could remove the risk by eradicating the organism. However, this 
       will not always be possible therefore good animal husbandry, personal 
       hygiene and the use of protective clothing will be needed. The correct 
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           86 
              disposal of waste and disinfection of contaminated areas is needed. In many 
              cases health surveillance can be provided to detect early signs and apply 
              treatment. The Occupational Health Unit should be consulted. Further 
              information is also contained in the HSE publication “The Occupational 
              Zoonoses” ISBN 0-11-886397-5. 
              10.6.4  Lower Vertebrate and Invertebrate Animals 
              There are certain hazards (e.g. venoms, allergies, etc.) associated with 
              some lower vertebrate and invertebrate animals which must be treated as 
              individual cases. The scales and frass produced by certain insects 
              (e.g.locusts and crickets) is a particularly powerful respiratory sensitiser and 
              the health surveillance requirements described in the preceding section 
              apply. When the introduction of such animals into laboratories is expected 
              the School Safety Officer must be notified in advance. 
              10.7    Ancillary Equipment 
              Care must always be taken to avoid contaminating any equipment, and to 
              ensure that the operation of the equipment does not in itself spread 
              contamination. (This is particularly important in the case of centrifuges). The 
              procedure for decontaminating contaminated equipment must be stipulated 
              in the relevant protocol. 
              Where equipment requires service or repair it must as far as is reasonably 
              practicable be rendered safe by an appropriate means and a safe conditions 
              certificate attached.  
              Autoclaves are designed to sterilise at high temperatures. Therefore periodic 
              checks must be carried out to ensure that the design temperature is actually 
              reached. Additional operational checks are also required see section 7.15 of 
              his handbook 
              Microwave ovens are being used increasingly for microbiological purposes. 
              Working procedures must always ensure that there is no risk of explosion. 
                                                                             0
              Incubating water baths at operating temperatures of 200C to 45 C can be a 
              source of legionella infection, particularly if fitted with a paddle stirrer which 
              could produce an aerosol. Advice on how to minimise this risk is contained 
              in Safety Office Guidance. 
              10.8    Transport of biological material  -  
              Details on the safe transport of biological materials and genetically modified 
              organisms is available on the Safety Office website in the University Code of 
              Practice for the Transport of Dangerous Goods. The University has engaged 
              the services of a Dangerous Goods Safety Adviser to provide advice on the 
              correct means of transporting biological materials and other hazardous 
              substances. For further details contact the Safety Office. 
              Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                   87 
            Section 11: Precautions in use 
            of Electricity 
            The fundamental hazard is of electrocution. 25 volts can be fatal under 
            certain circumstances. The voltage normally available at socket outlets and 
            lighting points is 230 volts. Voltage on 3-phase equipment such as electric 
            motors etc. is 415 volts. Electrical shock can be caused by bodily contact 
            between two conductors or between a conductor and earth. Electrical shock 
            and high frequency burns can be sustained from equipment such as 
            oscilloscopes and T.V. apparatus. 
             
            All precautions must be aimed at reducing the risk of contact with 
            unprotected conductors of electricity at potentially hazardous voltages. The 
            principle is to ensure that electrical equipment and wiring is safe by design, 
            and remains safe throughout its use. 
             
            All work with electricity must conform to the Electricity at Work Regulations 
            1989, which are based on this principle. The University’s Code of Practice 
            for Electrical Safety provides guidance on implementing these Regulations 
            and on safe working practices in general).  
            Part A deals with the safe use, maintenance, inspection and testing of 
            commercial electrical equipment.  
            Part B deals with electrical equipment and test rigs designed and/or 
            constructed within the University.  
            Part C deals with live working situations. 
              
            The introduction and Part A will be of universal application to Schools and 
            Departments etc, whereas Parts B or C will be relevant to a very limited 
            range of sections. 
             
            11.1    General Precautions 
            Under no circumstances must electrical installations be interfered with. The 
            fixed electrical installation of the buildings is the responsibility of the Chief 
            Engineer within the Estate Office. The fixed installation includes wiring up to 
            and including the socket outlet, or the isolator in the case of more 
            permanently installed pieces of equipment. No one may work on the fixed 
            installation without permission from the Chief Engineer. Schools and 
            sections are responsible for wiring installations and equipment from the 
            socket or isolator outwards. 
             
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              88 
                   An inventory of electrical equipment is kept by Schools and Departments etc 
                   to enable necessary examinations and tests to be made. All equipment, 
                   including second hand equipment, which is new to the location, should be 
                   entered on the inventory and checked in accordance with the Code of 
                   Practice. Should equipment be mothballed and taken off the inspection and 
                   testing programme then it should be clearly labelled "Not to be used until 
                   inspected and/or tested" and disabled for use, for example by removal of 
                   the plug.  
                    
                   People using electrical equipment, as with all work equipment, should report 
                   any defects that they note so that remedial action may be taken. Defective 
                   equipment should be labelled as faulty and its associated plug removed if it 
                   is not repaired immediately. The range of checks which users should be able 
                   to carry out as a routine part of their work includes: 
                        damage (apart from light scuffing) to the insulating sheath around the       
                         cable; 
                        damage to the plug; 
                        joints in the cable other than by way of proprietary cable connectors; 
                        the ineffective securing of the outer insulation sheath of the cable 
                         where it enters the plug or the equipment, e.g. the coloured insulation 
                         of the internal cable cores was showing; 
                        damage to the external casing of the equipment; 
                        evidence of overheating, e.g. burn marks or discoloration to plugs, 
                         cables, or casings; 
                        evidence of inappropriate use, e.g. it is wet or excessively contaminated 
                         with chemicals, oil or dirt etc. 
                    
                   Any loose connections, for example loose screws in plugs and switches, 
                   must be reported for remedial action to be taken. 
                    
                   11.2        Flexible Cables 
                   Ensure that flexible cables are of the correct size for the load to be carried 
                   and sheathed with rubber or PVC to withstand mechanical damage. 
                    
                   Flexible cables should be examined frequently to ensure that earth 
                   continuity is maintained and that no damage has occurred. Frayed or un-
                   anchored cables or plugs must be reported immediately for remedial action 
                   to be taken. 
                    
                   The use of flexible cables of excessive length is to be avoided. Extension 
                   cables should be used with great care and must not be joined except by the 
                   use of proper plugs and sockets. 
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      89 
            The use of multiple cables from one plug should be avoided. Approved 2, 3 
            or 4 way multiple sockets are available, but care should be taken not to 
            exceed 3kW total load. Multiple socket boards are available with a mains 
            neon indicator lamp, and consideration should be given to using an RCCD 
            plug with such socket assemblies. Trailing cables can constitute a tripping 
            hazard. Wherever practicable, there should be sufficient socket outlets to 
            allow for the use of flexible cables of minimum length. Flexible cables must 
            not be used for voltages above 240 or a loading greater than 3 kilowatts. 
             
            Twin core cables, such as bell wire and twisted flex must not be used on 
            230 volts. 
             
            11.3    Portable Appliances 
            These should be used with great care and particular attention paid to the 
            condition of the flexible cable and its termination at the equipment and at 
            the plug. It is recommended that low voltage or double insulated equipment 
            should be used wherever possible and all new portable hand tools should be 
            of this type. It is preferable that low voltage equipment should be of the 
            cordless type, which does not need a transformer. If a 110 volt transformer 
            is used it should be centre tapped to earth. (See HSE Guidance Note GS 
            27). It is a requirement of the Electricity at Work Regulations that all 
            electrical equipment is maintained to avoid dangerous situations arising. 
            Part A of the Universities Code of Practice for Electrical Safety describes the 
            arrangements for formal inspection, and testing where necessary, of 
            portable electrical appliances. 
             
            This applies equally to all privately owned mains-operated electrical 
            equipment brought into the University. Such equipment must be 
            approved by the School, Department or Hall and arrangements made 
            for its regular testing. 
             
            11.4    Fuses 
            The smallest fuse compatible for the apparatus should be used in order to 
            protect the equipment and flexible cable and to reduce the fire hazard. It is 
            important that only proper cartridge fuses are used for replacement and in 
            no case should any substitutes be employed. Before replacing a fuse, the 
            reason for the fuse blowing should be ascertained and the cause remedied. 
            Under no circumstances must an attempt be made to replace a fuse in a 
            main fuse board. 
             
            11.5    Fire Hazard 
            The amount of electrical energy available from a socket outlet is more than 
            sufficient to cause a fire if the equipment is misused or wrongly connected. 
            It is recommended that plugs be removed from sockets when apparatus is 
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              90 
            not in use in order to reduce the hazard from live flexible cables. Use dry 
            powder or Carbon Dioxide extinguishers only on electrical fires and isolate 
            the source of supply if possible. 
             
            Particular care should be taken when working near wet batteries during or 
            shortly after charging. The hydrogen produced during charging could be 
            ignited by an open flame or an electrical spark, for example a conductive 
            tool short-circuiting across the terminals. Non-conductive or insulated tools 
            should be used when working with wet batteries. 
             
            If in doubt about any electrical apparatus advice can be obtained 
            from the Senior Engineer within the Estate Office. 
             
            11.6    Radiation Hazards from Certain High Voltage Electrical 
            Equipment 
            In equipment incorporating electronic tubes operating at potentials above 
            5000 volts e.g. cathode ray tubes, electron microscopes, there is a risk that 
            X-rays may be emitted. Work with such equipment may therefore be carried 
            out only with the knowledge and approval of Director of Health and Safety 
            (see “Precautions with Sources of Ionising Radiation”). 
             
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              91 
              Section 12: Precautions for 
              Working with Non-Ionising 
              Radiation 
               
              Non ionising radiation is electromagnetic radiation covering the range of 
              wavelengths from 100nm [Ultra Violet] to > 1000km [Electromagnetic fields 
              EMF]. 
               
              The types of non-ionising radiation are: 
               
              Ultraviolet [UV]            ] 
              Visible Light               ]        Optical radiation   
              Infrared [IR]               ] 
              Laser                       ] 
               
              Electric & Magnetic fields [EF/EMF] 
              Radiowaves [includes microwaves] 
               
              The highest energy is emitted by UV with EMF being at the lower energy end 
              of the spectrum. 
               
              12.1     Optical radiation  
              The tissues of the body affected by optical irradiation are the skin and eyes. 
              The biological effects are as follows 
                               Skin                                    Eyes 
              Sunburn          [UV]                    Pain, light sensitivity, tearing [UV] 
              Ageing            [UV]                   Cataract [UV & IR] 
              Cancers           [UV]                   Burns and retinal damage [Vis, IR] 
              Burns              [Visible & IR] 
               
               
              12.1.1  UV radiation (UVR) [100nm to 400nm] 
              Typical sources of UV within the University are: 
                  Sun [outdoor workers, field trips] 
                  Electric arc welding 
                  Mercury, metal halide and high-energy discharge lamps [e.g. curing, 
                   drying, printing processes 
                  Certain laboratory equipment [spectrophotometers, transilluminators 
                   etc.] 
               
              Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                      92 
                   a)          Sun 
                   People working outdoors for prolonged periods, are likely to be exposed to 
                   UVR from the sun, even on cloudy days. Those travelling aboard on field 
                   trips and other University business are also at risk of exposure. 
                    
                   A combination of the following precautions should be taken. 
                        Use of shade structures and awnings made from material offering 
                         sufficient protection. 
                        Planning and timetabling for outdoor work to minimise exposure to 
                         direct sunlight during periods of greatest intensity and to limit the total 
                         duration of exposure. 
                        Use of UVR protective clothing [loose with close weave] 
                        Wear wide brimmed hat. 
                        Use protective eyewear with side protection 
                        Where sun cannot be adequately protected by clothing, some people 
                         may choose to apply sunblock or high SPF suncream. Apply generously 
                         15 minutes in advance of exposure and repeat application frequently 
                    
                   b)          Electric arc welding involves intense forms of UVR. Staff involved 
                   in this work must have received appropriate training. The following 
                   precautions must be taken: 
                    
                   Work-piece and work area must be shielded and enclosed as much as 
                   possible 
                   Restrict access to area where possible and prevent inadvertent exposure. 
                   Both eyes and skin must be protected using appropriate visors and clothing.  
                   Protect others that have to be in the area. 
                    
                   c)          Laboratory equipment.  Laboratory UVR sources such as 
                   transilluminators and gel documentation equipment usually emit UVR in the 
                   region of 280nm to 400nm. Detailed information and guidance on their safe 
                   use can be found on the Safety Office website. Eye and skin protection is 
                   required.  
                   12.1.2  Infra-red radiation [IRR] 
                   Intense IRR sources can result in skin burns or a risk of cataracts 
                   developing. The hazard is associated with furnace work and powerful 
                   heating and drying processes using IRR. Glass or metal doors with 
                   interlocks and warning notices are recommended. 
                    
                   12.1.3  Lasers 
                   The use of lasers in the University is subject to the University Code of 
                   Practice for Laser Safety. This is published on the Safety Office website. The 
                   following summarises many of the key aspects of this. Lasers embedded in 
                   office equipment such as printers, CD-ROM drives and class 1 or 2 laser 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      93 
       pointers are not considered to be hazardous are not subject to these 
       controls. 
        
       Work with laser systems may only be undertaken after assessment of the 
       hazards associated with it and providing that suitable facilities, local 
       procedures and organisational arrangements are in place. Users must be 
       trained and competent and be adequately supervised. 
        
       Most types of laser operating in the visible and near infrared regions are 
       sufficiently intense as to represent a hazard to the eye. Although damage 
       may be caused to all parts of the eyes, the most vulnerable part is the 
       retina, on which the beam may be focussed by the eye lens resulting in the 
       destruction of tissues and the creation of permanent blind spots. High power 
       lasers can also damage the skin. 
        
       It is important to establish whether the laser used produces a beam in the 
       visible part of the EM spectrum or not. In the case of the latter, personnel 
       may be unaware that they have been exposed to laser radiation unless clear 
       warning is given that the laser is operating. 
        
       Laser hazard is identified by classification of the laser (1 to 4, with 3 and 4 
       posing greater hazard). The class of each laser must be marked clearly by 
       the supplier. Lasers falling into class 3 (either 3R, the lower hazard 
       subdivision of this class, or 3B, the higher hazard subdivision), or class4 
       must be registered with the Safety Office. Laser registrations must be 
       accompanied by a risk assessment and a Laser Survey Form.  
        
       Users of class 3 or 4 lasers must also be registered with the Safety Office. 
       Users of class 3B and 4 lasers must attend for an eye examination at 
       Occupational Health. In the event of a suspected eye exposure to such a 
       laser the user must notify their supervisor or School Laser Supervisor and a 
       further examination will be arranged. 
        
       Safety measures usually concentrate on making the beam path inaccessible, 
       thus preventing exposure. In many applications (i.e. particle sizing, 
       interferometry and Raman spectrometry) the laser will be enclosed. Where 
       research applications with unenclosed high power beams are involved, a 
       mixture of engineering controls, administrative procedures and personal 
       protection will be needed. 
        
       Lasers should be operated with as high a background level of illumination as 
       possible to ensure that the pupil of the eye is small and in some cases it 
       may be advisable to wear protective goggles. The goggles to be worn 
       should be appropriate to the wavelength of the laser beam being used. 
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           94 
            Care should be taken to check the paths of all possible reflections and if 
            necessary non-flammable opaque screens should be used to protect 
            personnel.  
             
            There is a University Laser Safety Officer and Schools using Lasers have 
            appointed School Laser Supervisors. The University Laser Safety Officer can 
            be contacted via the Safety Office. 
             
            A video entitled “Laser Safety in Higher Education” is available from the 
            Safety Office and describes the hazards and controls in detail. All users of 
            class 3 and 4 lasers should attend the introductory session on laser safety 
            as part of their laser training programme. All users should receive 
            appropriate local training in the systems that they will be using. 
             
            Warning notices should be displayed where Lasers 
            are in use. A laser beam should never be looked 
            along directly. 
             
            Laser hazard label: 
            Symbol and border in black - Background yellow 
             
             
            12.2    Electric and magnetic fields. 
            Electric and magnetic fields arise from the generation, transmission, 
            distribution and use of electricity and in broadcasting and 
            telecommunications, radar, induction and dialectic heating 
             
            12.2.1  Electric fields are produced as the voltage forces electricity along 
            a wire. The higher the voltage the stronger the field produced. Electric fields 
            around a wire only cease to exist when the appliance is unplugged or 
            switched off at the socket. They will still exist however around the cabling 
            within the wall or infrastructure. 
             
            The direct effects on the body include perception effects such as tingling 
            skin, small harmless shocks and induced currents in the body that may 
            cause adverse effect.  
             
            12.2.2  Magnetic fields are created when an electric current flows, the 
            greater the current the stronger the magnetic field. Certain items of 
            equipment [NMR machines & MRI scanners] used within the University 
            intentionally produce very strong magnetic fields. These may induce much 
            larger currents in the body than electric fields and can interfere with the 
            functions of the nervous system and light flashes may be noticed in the eye. 
             
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              95 
                   At frequencies in excess of 10MHz heating effects can occur and in excess of 
                   100MHz these can lead to adverse health effects.  
                    
                   There are a number of indirect effects that can occur including 
                        Movement (potentially violent) of ferrous metal objects in the field 
                        Spark discharge 
                        Heating and interference with pacemakers, metallic implants etc. 
                    
                   The door to any room containing a powerful magnetic source should have a 
                   warning sign indicating the hazard and access should be restricted whilst the 
                   magnet is in operation. 
                    
                   12.3        Radiowaves 
                    
                   12.3.1  Radio waves are made up of both electric and magnetic fields and 
                   are the basis for telecommunication and broadcasting systems. Antennas 
                   radiate or receive radio signals. Those that irradiate can do so in all 
                   directions for broadcasts or in narrow beams for point to point 
                   communications. 
                    
                   The strength of field is dependent on: 
                        The total radiated power [the higher the power the stronger the field] 
                        Radiation pattern [narrow beams contain stronger fields] 
                        Distance from the antenna – as distance increases field strength 
                         decreases 
                    
                   Health Effects 
                   The only established health effects of the body absorbing radio waves are 
                   due to partial or whole body heating which could cause tissue damage or 
                   heat stress. This occurs at frequencies above 10 MHz, with the depth of 
                   penetration decreasing with increasing frequency. At lower frequencies 
                   currents could be induce which can interfere with function of nervous 
                   system. 
                    
                   Metal objects near high-powered transmitters can cause burns if touched. 
                    
                   The current evidence for an association between exposure to 
                   electromagnetic fields and cancer is weak and no biological mechanisms 
                   have been established for such an effect. It would however be prudent to 
                   minimise exposure to the lowest practicable level whilst working with or 
                   near sources of radiowaves. 
                    
                   12.3.2  Mobile Phones. These convert sound into radio waves for 
                   transmission or reception. Handsets are used close to the body and the 
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      96 
       head of the user will absorb some of the waves.  There is no evidence that 
       this has detrimental effect but applying precautionary principles and limiting 
       use is advised. The use of hand-held mobile phones whilst driving is 
       prohibited (See Section 6.14) 
        
       12.3.3  Microwaves are radio waves and are emitted by certain types of 
       equipment such as open-ended wave-guides and microwave ovens. 
        
       Care must be taken when using open-ended wave-guides. Burning of the 
       skin may occur if any part of the body is placed in the path of the beam. 
       The eyes are particularly vulnerable and in no circumstances should one 
       look down an open-ended wave-guide when the source of microwave power 
       is switched on. Some microwave generating equipment may also produce X-
       rays. 
        
       Microwave ovens are designed to ensure that all microwave radiation is 
       contained within the working volume. However, if damage occurs there is a 
       possible risk to operating personnel. It is therefore necessary to arrange for 
       periodic measurements of the radiation levels outside the oven. The 
       Engineering Faculty Workshop has the facilities to carry out these tests and 
       is prepared to do so on request.  
        
       Microwave ovens are also widely used in laboratories. Specific guidance on 
       their safe use is available on the Safety Office website. 
        
       Further information on the occupational exposure levels associated with 
       the use of sources of optical and electric and magnetic fields available from 
       the safety office or can be accesses on the Public Health England website.  
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           97 
                   Section 13: Precautions with 
                   Sources of Ionising Radiation 
                    
                   The use in the University of radioactive materials and apparatus producing 
                   ionising radiation is governed by the Ionising Radiations Regulations 1999. 
                   The acquisition and disposal of radioactive materials is regulated by the 
                   Radioactive Substances Act 1993, which is enforced by the Environment 
                   Agency. The Director of Health and Safety exercises general supervision in 
                   these matters. 
                    
                   The University's arrangements for managing work with sources of ionising 
                   radiation are described in Safe Working with Radiation, which is published 
                   on the Safety Office web-site.  
                    
                   The Safety Office must be pre-notified of any intention to commence work 
                   with radiation sources for the first time or of subsequent significant 
                   changes, for example at a new location, or with new or additional sources, 
                   or for a new application using existing sources. This to enable the Safety 
                   Office to ensure that the work can be carried out in accordance with the 
                   legal requirements. Particular attention must be paid to certain types of 
                   analytical equipment which, although not involving deliberate work with 
                   radioactive material, might contain a radioactive source as part of the 
                   detection system, for example electron capture devices found on some gas 
                   chromatograms, or calibration sources for liquid scintillation counters. 
                    
                   Each School working with radiation sources must:  
                        Appoint at least one Radiation Protection Supervisor to provide local 
                         control and advice on radiation matters. No work with ionising radiation 
                         is permitted without such an appointment. 
                        Develop a set of written Local Rules for safe working with radiation, and 
                         the acquisition and disposal of radioactive materials.  
                        Register radiation workers with the Safety Office. 
                        Pre-notify to the Safety Office the intention to acquire, relocate, modify, 
                         decommission or dispose of closed radioactive source or X-ray 
                         equipment. 
                        Pre-notify to the Safety Office the intention to work with 
                         radiochemicals.  
                        Prior to working with radiation sources, a risk assessment must be 
                         completed and written procedures for use produced.  
                        No radiation work may be carried out without the knowledge and 
                         consent of the Radiation Protection Supervisor and the Safety Office. 
                    
                   Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                                                      98 
            Every individual working with ionising radiations or radioactive substances 
            has a duty to protect both themselves and others from any hazard arising 
            from his work. They must inform themselves of the correct safe working 
            procedures as outlined in the University booklet “Rules for Radiation Safety” 
            (personal issue as part of the worker registration process) and in the Area 
            Local Rules. Further information may be found in the notes accompanying 
            the radiation training that is held for new radiation workers. A copy of these 
            notes can be found at the Safety Office website. 
             
            It is a legal requirement under the Radioactive Substances Act that 
            radioactive materials may be brought into the University, and radioactive 
            waste disposed of, only in accordance with authorisation from the 
            Environment Agency. Hence all orders for radioactive materials must be 
            countersigned by the School Radiation Protection Supervisor. Radiochemical 
            orders, stocks and disposals must be recorded on Isostock at the time that 
            the transaction is made. Regular recorded checks (usually at least monthly) 
            are made of both radiochemical stocks and closed sources. Undergraduates 
            must not attempt to dispose of any radioactive waste. 
             
            There are also strict controls on the movement or transport of radioactive 
            materials between different premises. These controls include requirements 
            on the packaging and labelling to be used, documentation to accompany the 
            package and duties on the driver of the vehicle. Radioactive materials 
            cannot be sent through the post or carried on public transport. There are 
            couriers who specialise in this. Advice must be sought from the Safety Office 
            if work of this nature is being considered, e.g. collaborative work with other 
            organisations or between different campuses. Information is also available 
            on the Safety Office website. 
             
            Uranium and thorium holdings are subject to additional controls – see 
            section 9.14 
             
            Access to laboratories where the Trefoil  
            Radiation symbol is posted on the door is  
            strictly limited to authorised personnel.  
             
            Black Trefoil on yellow background      
                     
             
            For Further Advice Contact: 
            The Safety Office - tel. 13401 or the School Radiation Protection Supervisor. 
                                                                     
            Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                                              99 
       Section 14: Sources of Health 
       and Safety Information 
        
       The key source of University-related safety guidance is the Policy and 
       Guidance section on the Safety Office website. In addition, the Safety Office 
       holds original copies of key publications that are of significant use in the 
       University, for example HSE documents relating to legislation, statutory 
       "Approved Codes of Practice" and guidance on the application of legal 
       standards. The Safety Office also subscribes to an on-line source for health 
       and safety information. 
        
       The key source of national safety guidance, including health and safety 
       legislation, is the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) website. 
        
       Academic areas of the university can access British Standards via the 
       elibrary gateway service provided by Information Services. 
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           100 
       Section 15: School Safety 
       Officers 
       All Schools and Departments have one or more Safety Officers who are 
       appointed by the Head of School, Department or equivalent, and notified to 
       the Safety Office.  
       The name(s) of the Safety Officer(s) in any area should be publicised 
       through normal School/Departmental arrangements and listed within the 
       local safety policy. A list of all School Safety Officers is maintained on the 
       Safety Office Workspace. 
       If you are unable to access this list or require further information to identify 
       the appropriate person for your area please contact the Safety Office by 
       emailing bb-safety-office@exmail.nottingham.ac.uk. 
        
        
       Safety Handbook 2013/14                       The University of Nottingham 
                           101 
