                               The Health and Safety Executive’s Five steps to risk assessment  
                                                                                                             
                           Step 1: Identify the hazards 
                                        Walk around your venue and look at what could reasonably be expected to cause 
                                        harm. 
                                        Ask your other people what they think. They may have noticed things that are not 
                                        immediately obvious to you.  
                                        Visit the HSE website. HSE publishes practical guidance on where hazards occur 
                                        and how to control them. There is much information on the hazards that might affect 
                                        your event. 
                                        If  you  are  a  member  of  a  trade  association,  contact  them.  Many  produce  very 
                                        helpful guidance. 
                                        Check manufacturers’ instructions or data sheets for chemicals and equipment as 
                                        they can be very helpful in spelling out the hazards and putting them in their true 
                                        perspective. 
                                        Remember to think about long-term hazards to health (eg high levels of noise or 
                                        exposure to harmful substances) as well as safety hazards.  
                           Step 2: Decide who might be harmed and how 
                           For each hazard you need to be clear about who might be harmed; it will help you identify 
                           the best way of managing the risk. That doesn’t mean listing everyone by name, but rather 
                           identifying groups of people (eg ‘people working in the storeroom’ or ‘passers-by’). 
                           Remember: 
                                        some workers have particular requirements, eg new and young workers                                                                   , migrant 
                                        workers             ,  new  or  expectant  mothers  and  people  with  disabilities  may  be  at 
                                        particular risk. Extra thought will be needed for some hazards; 
                                        cleaners,  visitors,  contractors,  maintenance  workers  etc,  who  may  not  be  in  the 
                                        venue  all the time; 
                                        members of the public, if they could be hurt by your activities; 
                                        ask others if they can think of anyone you may have missed. 
                           In each case, identify how they might be harmed, i.e. what type of injury or ill health might 
                           occur. For example, ‘shelf stackers may suffer back injury from repeated lifting of boxes’. 
                           Step 3: Evaluate the risks and decide on precautions 
                           Having spotted the hazards, you then have to decide what to do about them. The law 
                           requires you to do everything ‘reasonably practicable’ to protect people from harm. You can 
                           work this out for yourself, but the easiest way is to compare what you are doing with good 
                           practice. 
                           First, look at what you’re already doing, think about what controls you have in place and how 
                           it is organised. Then compare this with the good practice and see if there’s more you should 
                           be doing to bring yourself up to standard. In asking yourself this, consider: 
                                        Can I get rid of the hazard altogether? 
