          Why did you choose to write this novel using four points
          of view, and with Mira’s point of view in first person,
          the others in third person?
          I wanted to write the kind of book I love to read. I love a good
          family drama with a big cast of characters and colorful personalities.
          Also, it’s fun for me as a writer to get into different voices.
          It’s hard to get bored when you switch perspectives regularly. It
          did make for some tricky logistical issues sometimes. It was hard
          for me to remember what each character knew at any given point
          and where all the rest of them were, since the progression from
          chapter to chapter is not always precisely linear. But that was
          part of the fun, too. I put Mira’s voice in first person because I
          wanted to leave no doubt that this is her story, first and foremost.
          Also, she’s such a bold character. It would have seemed strange
          to speak for her, instead of letting her speak for herself.
          What inspired this story?
          I’d been trying to get published for a while, and that effort to be
          commercial had wrung all the joy out of my writing. I finally decided
          that I should write to entertain myself, and even if rejections
          rolled in, I could at least enjoy the process and be proud of the
          result. Happily, this book was received very well. I suspect this
          manuscript was the most authentic I’d ever produced.
          a + a u t h o r i n s i g h t s , e x t r a s , & m o r e . . .
          What kind of research did you do for the novel?
          I did some reading, and contacted Susan G. Komen for the Cure,
          but the best research of all came from interviewing local doctors.
          A prominent oncologist told me that women of Mira’s age often
          discover a lump in their breasts while holding their grandbabies.
          I found that detail so poignant that I worked it into the book.
          Another doctor walked me through a “diagnosis talk” just as she
          would give a real patient. She also told me how patient reactions
          to breast-cancer diagnosis have ranged all over the map and
          didn’t always follow what seemed logical or reasonable. This
          bolstered my faith in Mira as a genuine character, even if her
          reactions might not be “correct” or “expected.”
          Your novel’s epigraph is the famous first line from Anna
          Karenina, “All happy families are alike; each unhappy
          family is unhappy in its own way.” How do you think
          that quote applies to your book?
          I’m sure happy families are alike—all two of them! I’m being
          glib here, but my point is that every family has its problems,
          the Zielinskis included. It’s funny, some people who have read
         the manuscript seem amazed at how screwed up these characters
         are, when to me they don’t seem that far out of bounds. Maybe
         people are reacting to how all these problems seem to be coming
         to a head all on one weekend. That’s the way novels work,
         though. More drama that way.
         Is the story autobiographical?
         No. Mira is diagnosed with cancer before the story even begins,
         and that diagnosis drives much of the plot, but that’s not
         a reaction to anything that’s happened in my life. Everyone has
         someone in their circle of family and friends touched by cancer,
         but that’s not why I wrote about it. I needed a crisis to drive the
         story, and breast cancer is singularly terrifying to women. As
         for the other plot elements, I can relate to each of my characters
         on some level, but no one character represents me in the book.
         There’s one male voice in the book: the middle child,
         Ivan. Was it hard to write from a male point of view?
         Not especially. I can relate to Ivan quite a lot, in fact. He’s a
         struggling songwriter and at the time I wrote the book, I was an
         aspiring novelist. It wasn’t hard to convey his feelings of frustration
         over trying to break into a creative profession. Also, he and
         I share a love of Monty Python.
         Why did you set the book in Charlevoix, Michigan?
         This little town in northern lower Michigan is known as “Charlevoix
         the Beautiful” and it fits. I spent many summer weekends
         there visiting my grandparents, and some of my happiest memories
         come from walks on the dune at Mt. McSauba, or taking in
         a sunset from the pier. Mira and Max’s house is loosely based
         on the home on Dixon Avenue where my grandmother grew up.
         Charlevoix (pronounced SHAR-le-voy) is one of my favorite
         places in all the world, and I figured if I had to spend a year or
         more writing a book, I should at least dedicate the hours in my
         imagination to someplace beautiful.
