              The Essential Elements of 
               Writing a Romance Novel 
          by Leigh MichaeLs
          Even if you’re a seat-of-the-pants, explore-as-you-go sort of writer, there 
          are a few things you need to know about your story before you start seri-
          ously writing chapter one. Unsuccessful romances—especially the many 
          that writers start but never complete—stall out because the writer didn’t 
          know enough about the basic framework that holds every romance novel 
          together.
               Though it’s nearly impossible to have every detail worked out ahead 
          of time, if you don’t have a pretty good idea of your framework, you’ll 
          be apt to wander in frustration with a story that goes nowhere. Or you’ll 
          write chapter one over and over, trying to make it work, until you’re 
          heartily sick of your characters.
               So what are the basics you need to know up front?
               Let’s review the deifnition we established for the romance novel: A 
          romance novel is the story of a man and a woman who, while they’re 
          solving a problem that threatens to keep them apart, discover that the 
          love they feel for each other is the sort that comes along only once in a 
          lifetime; this discovery leads to a permanent commitment and a happy 
          ending. 
               This deifnition summarizes the four crucial basics that make up a 
               romance novel:
              1.   a hero and a heroine to fall in love
              2.   a problem that creates conlfict and tension between them and 
              threatens to keep them apart
              3.   a developing love that is so special it comes about only once in a 
              lifetime
              4.   a resolution in which the problem is solved and the couple is 
              united
               These things are the girders that hold up your entire story. Like the 
          steel skeleton of a skyscraper, each piece depends on the others. If one 
          is weak or lfawed, the whole structure is apt to fall down.
               What your hero and heroine have experienced in their pasts will inlfu-
          ence how they react to the problem they face in your story. The nature 
          of the conlfict between them will inlfuence their relationship and how the 
