              The Essential Elements of 
               Writing a Romance Novel 
          by Leigh MichaeLs
          Even if you’re a seat-of-the-pants, explore-as-you-go sort of writer, there 
          are a few things you need to know about your story before you start seri-
          ously writing chapter one. Unsuccessful romances—especially the many 
          that writers start but never complete—stall out because the writer didn’t 
          know enough about the basic framework that holds every romance novel 
          together.
               Though it’s nearly impossible to have every detail worked out ahead 
          of time, if you don’t have a pretty good idea of your framework, you’ll 
          be apt to wander in frustration with a story that goes nowhere. Or you’ll 
          write chapter one over and over, trying to make it work, until you’re 
          heartily sick of your characters.
               So what are the basics you need to know up front?
               Let’s review the deifnition we established for the romance novel: A 
          romance novel is the story of a man and a woman who, while they’re 
          solving a problem that threatens to keep them apart, discover that the 
          love they feel for each other is the sort that comes along only once in a 
          lifetime; this discovery leads to a permanent commitment and a happy 
          ending. 
               This deifnition summarizes the four crucial basics that make up a 
               romance novel:
              1.   a hero and a heroine to fall in love
              2.   a problem that creates conlfict and tension between them and 
              threatens to keep them apart
              3.   a developing love that is so special it comes about only once in a 
              lifetime
              4.   a resolution in which the problem is solved and the couple is 
              united
               These things are the girders that hold up your entire story. Like the 
          steel skeleton of a skyscraper, each piece depends on the others. If one 
          is weak or lfawed, the whole structure is apt to fall down.
               What your hero and heroine have experienced in their pasts will inlfu-
          ence how they react to the problem they face in your story. The nature 
          of the conlfict between them will inlfuence their relationship and how the 
     sexual tension develops. The traits that make this couple fall in love will 
     inlfuence what the happy ending will be. If the conlfict has no satisfactory 
     resolution, it’s not going to be a truly happy ending, even if the hero and 
     heroine lfing themselves into each other’s arms on the last page. 
       Knowing the basics up front will keep you from reaching the middle 
     of the book with a limp conlfict, no sexual tension, and two characters 
     who have absolutely no reason to want to be together.
     HERO AND HEROINE
     Without two people to fall in love, there is no story. Since you’re asking 
     readers to spend several hours with your characters, it’s important to cre-
     ate a hero and a heroine they want to know more about. That means the 
     characters have to be both real (so readers can relate to them on a hu-
     man level) and sympathetic (so readers feel the time they spend reading 
     the characters’ story is worthwhile).
       If the readers spend several hours reading the story, most of that time 
     will be in the company of the heroine. So your heroine must be someone 
     the readers can understand, like, and respect—someone they want to 
     hang around with. Someone who seems like a real person.
       The hero must be someone the readers can picture themselves falling 
     in love with. But you want them not just to fall in love with him—experi-
     encing that dizzying, glorious rush of emotion—you want them to stay in 
     love with him and believe that the heroine will be truly happy with him 
     forever. 
       The next chapter, which goes into detail about heroes and heroines 
     and how you can develop your main characters, may be the most impor-
     tant chapter in this book. If your hero and heroine don’t come to life for 
     your readers—if they aren’t people they care about, root for, and want to 
     be happy—they’re not likely to spend their precious time reading a book 
     about them.
       Knowing your characters is extraordinarily important. If you don’t 
     know these people almost as well as you know yourself, then how will 
     you know how they would react to the problems you’ve created for 
     them—or to each other? You will sometimes hear an author say some-
     thing like, “I wanted my heroine to be shaken up by the bad guy making 
     a pass at her, but she just rolled her eyes and said, ‘Yeah, right, like that’s 
     going to upset me.’ So I had to ifgure out another way to make her turn 
     to the hero for help.” 
       Your reaction might be to wonder if the writer is having a hallucina-
     tion. After all, the writer creates the character—so how can the character 
     simply refuse to cooperate? What the writer is really saying is that she 
     created a character so believable—so real—that she knows how that per-
     son would act or react in a given situation. When she then tries to write a 
     situation that is inconsistent with the character’s values or personality, the 
     character just won’t go along with the plan.
     CONFLICT
     While the developing relationship between the hero and heroine (which 
     we’ll address next) is at the center of the story, it is not the entire story. 
     If the main question in a romance novel is simply whether and when the 
     hero and heroine will admit they love each other, then the story will be 
     unsatisfying. Readers know from the beginning that they will, because 
     they’re reading a romance. Watching two people date, get to know each 
     other, and slowly explore their growing attraction isn’t terribly exciting.
       It’s the dififculties that surround this couple falling in love at this mo-
     ment—the dififculties that threaten to keep them from reaching a happy 
     ending—that keep the readers’ attention. The way in which these dif-
     ifculties impact these particular characters, putting pressure on them and 
     bringing out their good points and their lfaws, is what makes their story 
     exciting.
       That’s the main way in which romance novels differ from real life—in 
     real life, most of us prefer a calm and peaceful period to get to know 
     each other. But calm and peaceful don’t make a gripping book. It’s the 
     tension between the characters, caused by the problems they face, that 
     makes the story exciting and unforgettable.
       Tension between the characters is conlfict, the second of our impor-
     tant framework pieces. 
       In the excitement of creating your hero and heroine and developing 
     your story, it’s easy to confuse plot with conlfict. The plot is what happens 
     while your two characters are falling in love; it’s simply the sequence of 
     events. Conlfict is the dififculty between the hero and heroine that threat-
     ens to keep them from getting together. It arises because of the prob-
     lems the characters face. 
       Most romance novels have two types of conlfict: the short-term 
     problem and the long-term problem. The short-term problem (some-
     times called the external conlfict) revolves around the initial situation that 
     brings the couple together and keeps them together so they can get to 
     know each other. The long-term problem (sometimes called the internal 
     conlfict) is the deeper dififculty each character faces—the dififculty that 
     threatens to keep the couple from ifnding happiness together. 
       In many beginners’ stories, the hero and heroine have plenty of prob-
     lems. He’s having trouble with his business; she can’t get along with her 
     father; he’s got custody issues; she’s in debt. But unless these problems 
     cause tension between them, there’s a shortage of conlfict in the story.
       The hero and heroine don’t have to be at each other’s throats all the 
     time. In fact, it’s better if they aren’t always disagreeing. But if they agree 
     on everything, if their relationship is calm and peaceful, then what’s keep-
     ing them from recognizing and admitting they’re in love?
       On the other hand, if they can’t get along, why doesn’t one or the 
     other just walk away? Why can’t they avoid each other?
     THE ONCE-IN-A-LIFETIME LOVE 
     The need for a romance in a romance novel seems so obvious. After all, 
     the romance novel is a love story—the hero and heroine have to fall in 
     love. But if you stop and think about it, this important aspect is trickier 
     than it ifrst appears.
       It’s easy to write in a synopsis, “As they get to know each other, they 
     fall in love.” But showing that love growing is an entirely different propo-
     sition. If it happens too quickly, the readers will be bored. If it happens 
     too slowly, the readers won’t believe the happy ending.
       Each event in the story helps your lovers see each other differently, 
     discover new traits (good and bad), and get to know each other on a 
     deeper level.
       It’s much easier to focus on action or to detail the bad guy’s plans 
     than it is to portray, step-by-step, the slow lfowering of a caring relation-
     ship. As you develop the framework of your story, keep in mind the im-
     portance of the characters’ reactions to each other. What events will best 
     allow each to see new aspects of the other’s character? What is there 
     about each person that causes them to fall in love? What makes this 
     couple so perfect for each other (even though it doesn’t appear that way 
     at ifrst) that their love story will remain in the readers’ minds forever?
     THE RESOLUTION
     How is your story going to end? I’m not suggesting you have to know 
     every detail—before you start writing—about how your characters solve 
     their dififculties and live happily ever after, but it pays to have a good 
     idea. Having your destination in mind makes the journey easier.
       And if your book is to be a romance novel, then the story must ifnish 
     with a happy ending—a positive, upbeat, hopeful resolution, which in 
     most cases will involve a permanent commitment between the two main 
     characters.
       As you’re thinking in terms of framework, you don’t have to know 
     your characters’ street addresses or how many kids they end up hav-
          ing, but do look hard at any big issues you’ve raised. If your characters’ 
          conlfict has involved their lifestyles (he loves the country, she wants the 
          excitement of the city), will they compromise or will one of them give 
          in? If he hates her job, how do they resolve the problem so both can be 
          satisifed? If she’s had trouble trusting him, how does he prove himself (or 
          how does she convince herself he’s trustworthy now)?
               The most important thing about the resolution is that the issues—big 
          and small—that have separated the characters are settled in a way that 
          is logical and satisfying to the readers. Each issue is handled rather than 
          avoided; the solutions are plausible and iftting for the situations and the 
          characters, so the readers can believe that this agreement will last and 
          will continue to be acceptable to both main characters. A satisfying end-
          ing comes about because of the actions of the characters themselves, 
          not through the interference of others. 
          THINKING THROUGH YOUR FRAMEWORK
          You may not be ready to put on paper all the ideas for your hero and her-
          oine, conlfict, once-in-a-lifetime-love, and happy ending. After all, you’ve 
          just started to ifnd out why these things are important to your story.
               However, you need to be thinking about these separate elements 
          and how they interrelate as you develop your story. 
               The questions in the exercise below are good ones to keep in mind 
          as you write. If you ifnd yourself feeling bogged down as you think about 
          your story, go back to these questions. The time you spend in quiet 
          relfection early in the writing process could save you dozens of hours in 
          revising.
               If your idea is not yet developed enough to address these questions, 
          that’s okay. Keep them in mind as you read the next three chapters, and 
          you’ll be pleasantly surprised to ifnd the answers taking shape.
          in Review: studying the essentiaLs
              1.   Look back at the romance novels you’ve been studying and pick 
              out the essential ingredients of each story—hero and heroine, conlfict/
              problem, developing love story, and resolution. 
              2.   What qualities make each hero and heroine heroic? Real? Sympa-
              thetic? 
              3.   What makes each hero lovable? What makes each heroine some-
              one you’d like to know better? 
              4.   What is the problem that causes tension between the two main 
              characters and threatens to keep them from reaching a happy ending? 
              5.   How does this problem affect both hero and heroine? Why can’t 
             one or both of them simply walk away? 
             6.   What makes the love between these two characters special? Why 
             is this relationship perfect for them, the best love story they could pos-
             sibly have? 
             7.   How does the author resolve the big issues that have been raised 
             between the characters? Is the resolution surprising? Satisfying?
         the FRaMewoRk oF youR stoRy
             1.   Who is your heroine? What makes her sympathetic? What will the 
             readers like about her?
             2.   Who is your hero? What makes him someone the readers can fall 
             in love with?
             3.   What is the initial problem that brings the hero and heroine to-
             gether?
             4.   What forces them to stay in contact? Why can’t one of them just 
             walk away?
             5.   What do they see in each other? What features about each one 
             attract the other?
             6.   What larger dififculty, character lfaw, or past experience threat-
             ens to make it impossible for hero and heroine to be happy together 
             forever?
             7.   How do they solve those dififculties?
             8.   What is the happy ending? Does one of them make a sacriifce? 
             Do they compromise?
