                                      Guide on E-Invoice Submission  
                                       
                                      Note: You may only begin submitting E-Invoices on the Vendors@Gov after your vendor record is approved.  
                                       
                                      Step 1                                                                     – Login into Vendors@Gov at https://www.vendors.gov.sg. 
                                      Step 2                                                                     – Navigate to “Create E-Invoice”. The “Create E-Invoice” page comprises three (3) main sections that 
                                                                                                                must be completed to submit an E-Invoice.  
                                             A  Customer Details                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                             B                  E-Invoice Details                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                             C                  E-Invoice Line                                                                                       
                                                                Details 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                       
                                      Step 3                                                                     –  Under  Customer  Details,  select  the  relevant  “Ministry/Statutory  Board”,  “Department”,  “Sub-
                                                                                                                Business Unit” and fill up the “Attention to” field. An auto-complete function is available to assist you 
                                                                                                                in selecting the correct billing unit. Alternatively, click on the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       icon to view a full list of billing units. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                – Please contact your client agency’s point-of-contact to ascertain the correct billing unit. 
                                                                                                                – You may also click here to find a list of billing units in the public sector. For example, if you wish to 
                                                                                                                bill Anderson Primary School, you may search under:- 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ministry/Statutory Board: Ministry of Education; 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Department: All Govt & Aided School; and,  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sub-Business Unit: 0002-Anderson Pri Sch. 
                                                                                                                – Under the “Attention to” field, please indicate the point-of-contact who can verify that the goods 
                                                                                                                and services have been duly delivered to and received by your client agency. 
               Guide on E-Invoice Submission  
                
               Step 4                      – Complete the E-Invoice details.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                    1    Select “Yes” for Customer Accounting if the invoice is for the billing of relevant supplies of 
                                                            prescribed  goods  defined  in  IRAS’s  e-Tax  Guide  on  “GST:  Customer  Accounting  for 
                                                            Prescribed Goods” w.e.f. 1 January 2019.  
                                                    2    The Invoice Number should not exceed 27 characters and must not include any spaces or 
                                                            special characters (such as !, @, #, $, %, ^, & and * etc.).  
                                                    3    The Invoice Date may not be post-dated. Back-dating of the invoice is allowed for a maximum 
                                                            of seven (7) days. 
                                                    4    If you are billing on an Invoicing Instruction issued to you on GeBIZ by your client agency, it is 
                                                            compulsory to select the relevant Invoicing Instruction ID to submit an invoice. 
                                                    5    Select Direct Invoice if an Invoicing Instruction was not issued to you by your client agency 
                                                            on GeBIZ. 
                                                    6    The Related Invoice ID field is only applicable if you are submitting a Credit or Debit Note on 
                                                            a previously submitted E-Invoice. Else, the field may be left blank. 
                                                    7    The default Payment Term is set at 30 days. You may amend the payment term according 
                                                            to the agreed terms between you and your client agency.  
                                                    8    The default Currency is SGD. You may amend the currency according to the agreed terms 
                                                            between you and your client agency. When billing on an Invoicing Instruction, the currency 
                                                            may not be changed. 
                                                    9    The Description of the E-Invoice should not exceed 254 characters and must not include any 
                                                            special characters (such as !, @, #, $, %, ^, & and * etc.). If you are billing on an Invoicing 
                                                            Instruction, the description will be auto-populated. 
                                                   10   A Factoring Company is a commercial finance company (usually a bank) that specializes in 
                                                            the purchase of invoices or accounts receivable for cash. Unless there are arrangements with 
                                                            a factoring company for the invoice, the option "No" should be selected. Else, upon selecting 
                                                            "Yes", a drop-down list of factoring companies would appear for your compulsory selection. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                   11   Only  BMP,  GIF,  JPEG,  JPG,  PDF,  PNG  format  attachments  up  to  1  MB  are  accepted. 
                                                            Attachments will only be stored for one (1) day in Vendors@Gov once the transaction is 
                                                            processed. A message will prompt you that the attachment has been processed and a new 
                                                            filename will be provided. 
                                      Guide on E-Invoice Submission  
                                       
                                      Step 5                                                                     – Complete the E-Invoice line details.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                      1    The Description of the E-Invoice Line should not exceed 254 characters and must not include 
                                                                                                                                                            any special characters (such as !, @, #, $, %, ^, & and * etc.). If you are billing on an Invoicing 
                                                                                                                                                            Instruction, the description will be auto-populated. 
                                                                                                                                      2    The Quantity field accepts only numeric data, which includes decimal values. The character 
                                                                                                                                                            limit for quantity field is up to 11 characters and four (4) decimal places. If you are billing on 
                                                                                                                                                            an Invoicing Instruction, you may amend the quantity value to bill for part of the order. 
                                                                                                                                      3    The Unit Price field accepts only numeric data, which includes decimal values. The character 
                                                                                                                                                            limit for quantity field is up to 10 characters and five (5) decimal places. If you are billing on 
                                                                                                                                                            an Invoicing Instruction, the unit price will be auto-populated and not amendable. 
                                                                                                                                      4    For GST-registered vendors, Goods & Services Tax will be auto-calculated at the prevailing 
                                                                                                                                                            rate of 7% in Singapore. The GST amount should not be amended to any other figure unless 
                                                                                                                                                            the E-Invoice Line item is GST-Exempt or GST Out-of-Scope. In such cases where GST will not 
                                                                                                                                                            be billed for the E-Invoice Line, the GST should be set to zero (0) for that E-Invoice Line. 
                                                                                                                                                            If Customer Accounting was selected, the GST fields would be set to zero (0) and greyed-out, 
                                                                                                                                                            for your client agency will account to IRAS, GST Output on your behalf for the invoice. 
                                                                                                                                      5    Click on “Add Line” to insert another E-Invoice Line. The maximum number of lines for each 
                                                                                                                                                            E-Invoice is forty (40) lines. Please submit an additional E-Invoice if should the number of 
                                                                                                                                                            lines  required  exceeded  the  maximum  allowable.  The  “Add  Line”  button  would  not  be 
                                                                                                                                                            available if you are billing on an Invoicing Instruction. 
                                                                                                                                      6    If you do not wish to bill for a particular E-Invoice Line, click on the corresponding                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   icon to 
                                                                                                                                                            delete the E-Invoice Line item from the E-Invoice.  
                                       
                                      Step 6                                                                     – Review the total amounts of the E-Invoice. The "Freight Amount" field allows vendors to bill for 
                                                                                                                freight charges, if applicable. Please contact your client agency to confirm if your contract is applicable 
                                                                                                                to freight charges. If there are no freight charges applicable, the field may be left blank. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                – Click on the “Submit” button to submit the E-Invoice. Upon successful submission, the message 
                                                                                                                “Your Invoice has been successfully submitted.” will be displayed. 
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
