                   IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR INVOICE 
                   Invoices are issued at the start of every month and contain fees and charges for that month; 
                   the invoice payment is due at the end of that month. Invoices are sent electronically to your 
                   Monash student email account. 
                   It is important to note that the amount you need to pay usually changes every month.  You 
                   are charged a daily rate depending on the number of days in each month.  For example – 
                   June has 30 days, so you are charged 30 days by the applicable accommodation rate. 
                   If you receive a Credit Memo along with your Tax Invoice please deduct the credit total from 
                   the invoice total and then only pay the balance.  If you are unsure please contact an 
                   Admissions Officer from 8.30 am until 6.00 pm, 9905 6200 Monday to Friday or via email 
                   admissions.mrs@monash.edu 
                   If you are making payment via your credit card using the internet option available on your 
                   invoice, go to www.adm.monash.edu.au/finance/invoice.  Select ‘Monash Tax Invoice 
                   Payments’.  You will then be directed to the following page.  
                                                                                                    This is your invoice 
             This is where you enter your                                                           reference number and is 
             credit card number.                                                                    attached to your Student ID.  
                                                                                                    The reference number 
                                                                                                    changes every month.  It is 
                                                                                                    extremely important
                                                                                                                           that 
                                                                                                    you use the correct 
                                                                                                    reference number when 
                                                                                                    paying your bill.  Make sure 
             Turn your credit card over.                                                            when entering the reference 
                                                                                                    number you do not copy and 
             There is a row of numbers –                                                            paste it or enter any spaces; 
             the last 3 numbers is your                                                             it won’t work and you will be 
             Card Verification Number                                                               advised that the reference      
                                                                                                    number is invalid. 
                    
                                      Enter the payment amount.                                      
                                      If you have received a credit 
                                      memo along with your 
                                      invoice – make sure you 
                                      deduct the credit amount 
                                      from your invoice total and 
                                      then only enter the balance 
                                      amount. 
