                                   PLANTAR FASCIITIS : PATIENT INFORMATION LEAFLET 
                                                                     
                                                                    Plantar Fasciitis 
                                                                     
                                                                    Plantar fasciitis is a cause of pain under your heel. It usually 
                                                                    goes in time. Treatment may speed up recovery. Treatments 
                                                                    include rest, good footwear, insoles (orthoses), painkillers and 
                                                                    stretching  exercises.  A  steroid  injection  or  other  treatments 
                                                                    may be used in more severe cases. 
                                                                     
                                                                    What is plantar fasciitis? Plantar fasciitis mean inflammation of 
         your plantar fascia. Your plantar fascia is a strong band of tissue (like a ligament) that stretches 
         from your heel to your toes. It supports the arch of your foot and also acts as a shock-absorber in 
         your foot.  
          
         What causes plantar fasciitis? Repeated small injuries to the fascia (with or without inflammation) 
         are thought to be the cause of plantar fasciitis. The injury is usually near to where the plantar fascia 
         attaches to your heel bone. You are more likely to injure your plantar fascia in certain situations. 
         For example: 
                    If you are on your feet for a lot of the time e.g. walking, standing, running. 
                    If you have recently started exercising on a different surface  
                    If you have been wearing shoes with poor cushioning 
                    If you are overweight – this will put extra strain on your heel 
                    If there is an overuse or stretching of your sole e.g. athletes who increase running intensity 
                    or distances 
                    If you have a tight Achilles tendon. This can affect your ability to flex your ankle. 
                     
         How common is plantar fasciitis? Plantar fasciitis is very common. Around 1 in 10 people will get 
         plantar fasciitis at some time in their life 
          
         What are the symptoms of plantar fasciitis? Pain is the main symptom. This can be anywhere on 
         the underside of the heel. However commonly, one spot is found as the main source of pain. This 
         is often about 4 cm forward from your heel, and may be tender to touch. 
          
         The pain is often worse when you take your first steps on getting up in the morning, or after long 
         periods of rest where no weight is placed on your foot.  
          
         How is plantar fasciitis diagnosed? Your doctor can usually diagnose plantar fasciitis just by talking 
         to you and examining your foot. Your diagnosis may be assisted by a podiatrist, musculoskeletal 
         podiatrist or foot and ankle orthopaedic consultant as well as your doctor if your plantar fasciitis is 
         not settling or if another cause for your pain is suspected. Rarely, tests are needed if diagnosis is 
         uncertain  or to  rule  out  other  causes  of  heel  pain.  This  can  include  X-rays  of  the  heel  or  an 
         ultrasound scan of the fascia. An ultrasound or MRI shows thickening and swelling of the fascia in 
         plantar fasciitis. 
          
         What is the initial treatment for plantar fasciitis? Usually, the pain will ease in time. ‘Fascia’ tissue, 
         like ‘ligament tissue, heal quite slowly. It may take several months and a combination of different 
         treatments.  
          
          
                                                         Plantar Fasciitis: Patient Information Leaflet - Oct 2014 
