                     Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                                                                                      www.iiste.org 
                     ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper)   ISSN 2222-288X (Online) 
                     Vol.7, No.30, 2016 
                      
                            Do Kenyan Set Book Novel Kidagaa Kimemwozea Advance 
                                                            Environmental Education? 
                                                                                        
                                                                       Stephen Njangiru Magothe 
                         Department of Literary and Communication Studies, Laikipia University P.O Box 1100,Nyahururu,Kenya 
                                                                                        
                     Abstract 
                     Environmental protection is a sensitive issue in the world today. Erratic weather changes have been witnessed in 
                     many parts world including Kenya. Indeed, scholars and critics have argued that human beings are a major 
                     contributing factor to destruction of nature through industrialization, farming activities, transport, deforestation, 
                     wildlife  attacks,  and  destruction  of  wetlands,  unplanned  rubbish  dumping  and  pollution.  Environmental 
                     protection as a problem is real and has dire consequences such as global warming, soil erosion, floods, reduction 
                     in wetlands, drought, pollution, human wildlife conflict, diseases and illnesses, food insecurity, unsafe drinking 
                     water,  desertification  among  other  threats.  In  underdeveloped  countries  like  Kenya  the  consequences  are 
                     devastating. It’s because of this global reality that the researcher sought to establish whether environmental 
                     education  is  advanced  in  Kidagaa  Kimemwozea;  a  Kenyan  secondary  school  Swahili  novel  set  book.  The 
                     objectives were: To examine the environmental themes in the Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book and 
                     to evaluate its environmental protection impact on learners. The sampled Kidagaa Kimemwozea novel set book 
                     was  content  analyzed  in  terms  of  environmental  theme  illustrations  through  ordinary  words.  Moreover,  a 
                     questionnaire was given to randomly sampled 43 secondary school students to collect their views on how those 
                     illustrations impacted on their views on environmental protection. 
                     Keywords: Environmental Education and Protection, Themes, Ordinary Text, Set Book 
                      
                     1.   Introduction 
                     Environmental education refers to the process that allows individuals to explore environmental issues, engage in 
                     problem  solving,  and  take  action  to  improve  the  environment.  As  a  result,  individuals  develop  a  deeper 
                     understanding of environmental issues and have the skills to make informed and responsible decisions. On the 
                     other hand, environmental protection refers to any activity to maintain or restore the quality of environmental 
                     media  through  preventing  the  emission  of  pollutants  or  reducing  the  presence  of  polluting  substances  in 
                     environmental media for the benefit of both the environment and humans. (United Nations,1997).Environmental 
                     education as noted by Kimiti et al (2013) should assist individuals in taking action in environmental protection 
                     and improvement through various activities such as tree planting, cleaning of environment, participation in 
                     national and international environmental days and the whole discourse about management of ecosystems and 
                     sustainable  use  of  natural  environments  (Republic  of  Kenya,2014).  Environmental  degradation  due  to 
                     industrialization,  farming  activities,  transport,  deforestation,  wildlife  attacks,  improper  refuse  disposal  and 
                     pollution like in other parts of the world is prevalent in the Kenyan context, and the need to protect and conserve 
                     the environment for future generations from the worst calamities such as floods, expanding deserts, diseases and 
                     food insecurity (Kavila,2013). 
                                 The need to highlight environmental issues and consciousness have indeed prompted authors across 
                     the world to write. Notable examples of fiction novels are The Monkey Wrench Gang by Abbey Edward, The 
                     Lake, The River, and the Other Lake, by Amick Steve, The Last Good Chance By Barbash, Tom amongst many 
                     others. In Kenya, fiction novels with environmental themes are like Terrorists of the Aberdare and Different 
                     Colours by Ng’ang’a Mbugua. A thesis done by Kavila(2013) examines the novels; Terrorists of the Aberdare 
                     and  Different  Colours  and  discusses  causes  and  effects  of  environmental  degradation  and  human-wildlife 
                     conflict and proposes strategies to protect and conserve the environment for the betterment of current and future 
                     generations.. Since literature is a tool for education, Ng’ang’a Mbugua in his fictional works aims at educating 
                     his audience on environmental protection so as to reduce this imminent threat to flora and fauna that has direct 
                     dire  consequences  to  the  current  and  future  generations.  The  purpose  of  the  study  was  to  examine  the 
                     environmental themes in the Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book and to evaluate its environmental 
                     protection impact on learners. The study will be of help to students ,teachers, the public and policy makers in 
                     making the society be more responsive to environmental protection through environmental education. 
                                 
                      Studies on Ordinary Text Illustrations in Any Work Of Art.  
                     Available  research  has  it  that  ordinary  words  communicate  various  messages  and  therefore  assist  learners 
                     understand the content (Ombasa,2016). Novels, through ordinary text illustrations too communicate various 
                     themes to their audiences. Kidagaa Kimemwozea a Kiswahili category set book novel as a work of art also 
                     communicates various themes(Rono,2013).A theme on environment has also been brought out in the novel . A 
                     study  done  by  Kimiti  et  al(2013)  reveals  that  environmental  education  themes  have  been  incorporated  in 
                                                                                      24 
                           Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                                                                                      www.iiste.org 
                           ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper)   ISSN 2222-288X (Online) 
                           Vol.7, No.30, 2016 
                            
                           languages such as English and Kiswahili as well as others subjects like  Social Studies, Christian religious 
                           education, Agriculture and Geography.  
                            
                           Objectives of the Study 
                                  (i)  To examine the environmental education theme in Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book.  
                                  (ii)  To evaluate the environmental education impact on learners from environmental protection point of 
                                               view. 
                                                
                           Methodology 
                           Kidagaa kimemwozea set book novel was selected through purposive sampling. Environmental Illustrations and 
                           descriptions  through  the  ordinary  text  were  content  analyzed  in  line  with  the  objectives  of  the  study.  The 
                           questionnaire was designed and adapted according to the work of Denscombe (2007),and consisted of both open 
                           and closed questions. The questionnaire was administered to 43 secondary school students to collect their views 
                           on the impact of environmental education on environmental protection. 
                            
                           Study Findings and Discussion 
                           The results were categorized, presented and analyzed as follows: 
                                 i.     Environmental education themes in terms of novel’s thematic and statement concepts. 
                                ii.      Environmental education impact on learners from environmental protection point of view. 
                            
                           Environmental Education Themes in Terms of Novel’s Thematic and Statement Concepts. 
                           The study aimed at examining the environmental education theme in Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set 
                           book. In the literary sense, themes in a novel can be viewed in terms of thematic and statement concepts. 
                           Thematic concept is what readers think the work is about while thematic statement is what the work says about 
                           the subject (Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia). Thematic concept was brought out by student respondents, who 
                           when asked what they thought ‘environment’ meant, they responded as summarized in the table(2) below: 
                           Table (1) students age distribution 
                           Age                                                       Number                                                   percentage 
                           Age:(16-17)                                               2                                                        4.6% 
                           Age: (18-21)                                              41                                                       95.3% 
                                          Majority of student respondents (95.3%) were above 18 years of age and were considered to be mature. 
                           Their responses therefore were well informed in light of the research problem. 
                           Table (2) students perception on ‘environment’ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                          Natural environment refers to natural world of land , water, air, plants and animals that exist around us. 
                           It  forms  the  basis  of  our  existence  and  development  (Kavila,2013)  while  human  environment  as  per  the 
                           dictionary meaning is the place in which people live and work as well as all physical conditions that affect them. 
                                          A critical  look  at  the  above  results  shows  that  majority  of  student  respondents  (72.09%)  thought 
                           ‘environment’  in  terms  of  the  human  environment(All  conditions  that  live  with  and  affect  people).  10 
                           respondents(23.26%) thought ‘environment’ in terms of natural environment ( The natural world of land , water, 
                           air, plants and animals that exist around us) whereas only 2 (4.65% )respondents thought ‘environment’ in terms 
                           of  both  human  and  natural  environments.  Inference  made  therefore  is  that  majority  of  student  respondents 
                           thought  of  the  human  environment  as  compared  to  the  few  who  thought  of  the  natural  environment.  This 
                           suggests that the strategies used to teach environmental education in the curriculum are wanting. Study done by 
                           Kimiti et al(2013) suggested that the lecture, question and answer and other teacher centered methods were 
                           commonly used in Kenyan schools ; methods that are inappropriate because they do not promote students 
                           understanding.  
                                          On the other hand, Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book was content analyzed in terms of 
                           thematic statement; what the novel says about the natural environment subject. It was indeed found that the 
                           novel had many episodes of natural environment descriptions ranging from vegetation, land, grasslands, rivers, 
                           lakes and forests. Environmental degradation challenges such as pollution, overgrazing, unsafe drinking water 
                           and soil erosion are also discussed in the novel. An example is when the writer brings out the episode of a young 
                           boy by the name DJ and other boys looking after herds of cattle on a piece of land with pasture near river 
                           Kiberenge,  ultimately,  bringing  about  severe  overgrazing.  There  are  many  other  vivid  examples  of 
                           environmental degradation descriptions in the work. The novel also brings out the human environment concept 
                                                                                                              25 
                  Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                                                                                      www.iiste.org 
                  ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper)   ISSN 2222-288X (Online) 
                  Vol.7, No.30, 2016 
                   
                  through various examples of interactions between human characters and their immediate natural environment.. 
                            
                  Education Impact on Learners From Environmental Protection Point of View 
                  The  study  also  aimed  at  evaluating  the  environmental  education  impact  on  learners  from  environmental 
                  protection point of view. When asked what they thought of after reading various descriptions on environment, 38 
                  students(88.37%)  thought  that  environment  must  be  protected,  5  students(11.63%)  were  of  the  view  that 
                  environmental descriptions were merely for the continuation of the plot story in the novel. A critical look at these 
                  results suggests that majority of students recognize the importance of environmental protection in the society. 
                  This suggests that environmental education were indeed integrated in the Kenyan formal curriculum(Kimiti et al, 
                  2013). The students had therefore learned environmental issues from other subjects in the curriculum as opposed 
                  to the Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book. 
                   
                  Conclusion 
                  Findings from this research as reported and discussed seems to suggest that environmental education have been 
                  advanced in the Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book. Indeed, environmental education though from 
                  other  subjects  in  the  curriculum,  has  impacted  positively  on  the  student’s  attitudes  towards  environmental 
                  protection.  
                   
                  References  
                  Abbey, E.(1975). The Monkey Wrench Gang. Philadelphia: Lippincott. 
                  Amick, S.(2005). The Lake, The River, and the Other Lake. New York : Pantheon. 
                  Barbash, T(2002). The Last Good Chance. New York: Picador USA. 
                  Denscombe (2007) The Good Research Guide For Small-Scale Research Project.Mc Graw Hill. 
                  Kavila,  F.S.(2013)  The  Theme  Of  Environmental  Conservation  In  different  Colours  and  Terrorists  Of  The 
                           Aberdare  By  Ng’ang’a  Mbugua.  A  masters  of  arts  Research  Project  .Unpublished.  University  of 
                           Nairobi.  
                  Kimiti et al(2013) The Need to Integrate Themes of Environmental Education in the School Curriculum in 
                           Kenya: Journal of Progressive Education and Development.Vol.2,No.1 
                  Ombasa,A.E.(2016) Gender Disparity: Do Textbook Illustrations Reinforce It? A Case Study Of The Kenyan 
                           Secondary School Textbook- Chemchemi Za Kiswahili, Kidato Cha Nne. Indo-African Journal of 
                           Educational                  Research                  Vol.4,No.1(online)                 Available: 
                           http://iajer.rstpublishers.com/full_view_62.jws#page (September 8,2016) 
                  Republic of Kenya, (1999). Secondary School Syllabus: Volume2, October 2007. Nairobi: KIE. 
                  Republic of Kenya(2014) National Environment Policy.Nairobi:Ministry of Environment ,Water and Natural 
                           Resources.(online)                   Available:                   http://www.environment.go.ke/wp-
                           content/uploads/2016/08/NATIONAL-ENVIRONMENT-POLICY-2014.pdf (October 11th ,2016) 
                  Rono(2013)Uhakiki  wa  Kimaudhui  na  Kifani  wa  Kidagaa  Kimemwozea.  Tasnifu  ya  Shahada  ya  Uzamili. 
                           Haijachapishwa. Chuo Kikuu cha Nairobi 
                  Walibora,K.(2012)Kidagaa Kimemwozea.Nairobi:Target 
                   
                    
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                                                                       26 
