                    Checking the payment status of an invoice 
        
       For anyone with the SAP Approver role, you will have access to SAP transaction code /fbl1n.  We have 
       created a variant of this code that is designed to let you know the date that a future payment will be 
       generated, in the event that the transaction has already been processed by Accounts Payable (AP) but 
       the vendor payment terms have not yet triggered.   
       Once AP has processed an invoice, a 10-digit FI doc # will be generated, and you can find this through 
       various BUWorks reports.  Once you have the FI number for the invoice payment you are investigating, 
       you can then use the WebGUI tab in BUWorks, selecting the ECC System link (you may need to enable 
       popups in your browser). 
        
                                                   
        
       On the next screen, enter the transaction code FBL1N into the search bar and hit Enter. (This can also be 
       found in your User Menu, in the Department Approver – Decentralized folder). 
        
                                  
        
       On the next screen, click Get Variant. 
        
                                                   
        
       This will create a pop-up window labeled Find Variant.  You need to erase your name from the Created 
       By field, and then click the Execute button (circled in the image below). 
                                     
        
       Another window will pop up.  Double click on the top option: /INVPAYSTATUS 
        
                               
        
       This will bring you to the variant of the original FBL1N screen.  Click on Dynamic Selections (circled in the 
       image below). 
        
                                                   
        
       Enter the FI Doc # in the Document Number field, then click Execute. 
        
                                        
        
       This function may take a moment to process, but then it should create a screen containing the data 
       fields below. 
                                                   
        
       If the ‘Clearing’ field is occupied, this signifies that the payment has already been generated on the date 
       listed.  If it is empty, then the date listed in the Net Due Date field indicates when the payment will 
       generate.  Note: In the example above, the vendor WB Mason has vendor terms of Net-30, reduced 
       payment in 10 days.  Typically, the clearing date and net due date will match. 
        
       To look up the status of additional payments, you can use the Back button to return to the FBL1N 
       variant screen.  (You may need to click the button for Dynamic Selections again). 
