         Updated 1.8.2016    EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part   p. 1 
          
          
          
                   AGREEMENT ON THE EUROPEAN  
                          ECONOMIC AREA 
                                   
                                   
                      (OJ No L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3; and EFTA States’ official gazettes) 
                                   
         Amended by: 
          
         1.  Protocol Adjusting the Agreement on the European Economic Area of 17 March 1993 (OJ NoL 1,   3.1.1994, p. 
             572; and EFTA States’ official gazettes). 
         2.  EEA Council Decision No 1/95 of 10 March on the entry into force of the Agreement on the European Economic 
             Area for the Principality of Liechtenstein (OJ No L 86, 20.4.1995, p. 58; EEA Supplement No 14, 20.4.1995, p. 1). 
         3.  Agreement on the participation of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the 
             Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of 
             Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic in the European Economic Area of 14 October 2003 (OJ 
             No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 11; EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1). 
         4.  Agreement on the participation of Bulgaria and Romaniain   the European Economic Area of 25 July 2007( OJ No 
             L 221, 25.8.2007, p 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p. 1). 
         5.  Agreement between the European Union, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway on an EEA Financial Mechanism 
             for the period 2009-2014 (OJ No L 291, 9.11.2010, p. 4). 
         6.  Agreement on the participation of Croatia in the European Economic Area of 11 April 2014 (OJ No L 170, 
             11.6.2014, p. 5; EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1). 
         7.  Agreement between the European Union, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway on an EEA Fnciialna Mechanism 
             2014-2021 (OJ L 141, 28.5.2016, p. 3). 
          
          
          
                          
                 Updated 1.8.2016                           EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                              p. 2 
                  
                  
                                                                      
                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS 
                  
                  
                 PREAMBLE  
                  
                 PART I       OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES 
                  
                 PART II      FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS 
                  
                              Chapter 1   Basic principles 
                              Chapter 2   Agricultural and fishery products 
                              Chapter 3   Cooperation in customs-related matters and trade facilitation 
                              Chapter 4   Other rules relating to the free movement of goods 
                              Chapter 5   Coal and steel products 
                  
                 PART III     FREE MOVEMENT OF PERSONS, SERVICES AND CAPITAL  
                  
                              Chapter 1   Workers and self-employed persons 
                              Chapter 2   Right of establishment 
                              Chapter 3   Services 
                              Chapter 4   Capital 
                              Chapter 5   Economic and monetary policy cooperation 
                              Chapter 6   Transport 
                  
                 PART IV      COMPETITION AND OTHER COMMON RULES 
                  
                              Chapter 1   Rules applicable to undertakings 
                              Chapter 2   State aid 
                              Chapter 3   Other common rules 
                  
                 PART V       HORIZONTAL PROVISIONS RELEVANT TO THE FOUR FREEDOMS 
                  
                              Chapter 1   Social policy 
                              Chapter 2   Consumer protection  
                              Chapter 3   Environment 
                              Chapter 4   Statistics 
                              Chapter 5   Company law 
                  
                 PART VI      COOPERATION OUTSIDE THE FOUR FREEDOMS 
                  
                 Updated 1.8.2016                         EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                              p. 3 
                  
                  
                 PART VII    INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS  
                  
                             Chapter 1   The structure of the association 
                                          Section 1    The EEA Council 
                                          Section 2    The EEA Joint Committee 
                                          Section 3    Parliamentary cooperation 
                                          Section 4    Cooperation between economic and social partners 
                             Chapter 2   The decision-making procedure 
                             Chapter 3   Homogeneity, surveillance procedure and settlement of disputes 
                                          Section 1    Homogeneity 
                                          Section 2    Surveillance procedure 
                                          Section 3    Settlement of disputes  
                             Chapter 4   Safeguard measures  
                  
                 PART VIII   FINANCIAL MECHANISM 
                  
                 PART IX     GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS 
                                  Updated 1.8.2016                                                                     EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                                                     p. 4 
                                   
                                   
                                                       1
                                                      ( ) AGREEMENT ON THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AREA 
                                   
                                   
                                   2
                                  ( )THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY, 
                                  THE KINGDOM OF BELGIUM, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA 
                                  THE CZECH REPUBLIC, 
                                  THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK, 
                                  THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF ESTONIA, 
                                  IRELAND, 
                                  THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC, 
                                  THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN, 
                                  THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, 
                                   3
                                  ( )THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA, 
                                  THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA, 
                                  THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG, 
                                   4
                                  ( )HUNGARY, 
                                   5
                                  ( )THE REPUBLIC OF MALTA, 
                                  THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND, 
                                  THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC, 
                                  ROMANIA 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF SLOVENIA, 
                                  THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC, 
                                  THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND, 
                                  THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN, 
                                  THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, 
                                   
                                  AND 
                                   
                                  [  ] 6
                                       ( ) 
                                                                                             
                                   1
                                  ( )     As amended by the Adjusting Protocol and subsequently by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 anEdE A Supplement 
                                          No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005 and subsequently by the 2007  EEEnAlargement Agreement (OJ No L 
                                          221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.1), provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011. 
                                   2
                                  ( )     As amended by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplemento  23,N  29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally 
                                          applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005, and subsequently by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement O(J No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; EEA Supplement 
                                          No 39, 26.6.2008, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011. 
                                   3
                                  ( )     As amended by the 2014 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L17 0, 11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1 )pr, ovisionally 
                                          applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f. pending. 
                                   4
                                  ( )     Words “The Republic of” deleted by the 2014 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 170, 11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1), 
                                          provisionally applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f. pending. 
                                   5
                                  ( )     Words “The Republic of” added by the 2014 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L170,                                       11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1), 
                                          provisionally applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f. pending. 
                          Updated 1.8.2016                                                  EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                             p. 5 
                           
                           
                          ICELAND, 
                          THE PRINCIPALITY OF LIECHTENSTEIN, 
                          THE KINGDOM OF NORWAY,  
                          [  ] 7
                              ( ) 
                               8
                          [  ]( ) 
                           
                          hereinafter referred to as the CONTRACTING PARTIES; 
                           
                           
                          CONVINCED of the contribution that a European Economic Area will bring to the construction of a Europe based on peace, 
                          democracy and human rights; 
                           
                          REAFFIRMING the high priority attached to the privileged relationship between the European Community, its Member 
                          States and the EFTA States, which is based on proximity, long-standing common values and European identity; 
                           
                          DETERMINED to contribute, on the basis of market economy, to world-wide trade liberalization and cooperation, in 
                          particular in accordance with the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Conventiton he on 
                          Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 
                           
                          CONSIDERING the objective of establishing a dynamic and homogeneous European Economic Area, based on common 
                          rules and equal conditions of competition and providing for the adequate means of ecenmforent including at the judicial 
                          level, and achieved on the basis of equality and reciprocity and of an overall balance of benefits, rights and obligations for 
                          the Contracting Parties; 
                           
                          DETERMINED to provide for the fullest possible realization of the fr emeovement of goods, persons, services and capital 
                          within the whole European Economic Area, as well as for strengthened and broadened cooperation in flanking and horizontal 
                          policies; 
                           
                          AIMING to promote a harmonious development of the European Economic Area and convinced of the need to contribute 
                          through the application of this Agreement to the reduction of economic and social regional disparities; 
                           
                          DESIROUS of contributing to the strengthening of the cooperation between the members of the European Parliament and of 
                          the Parliaments of the EFTA States, as well as between the social partners in the European Community and in the EFTA 
                          States; 
                           
                          CONVINCED of the important role that individuals will play in the European Economic Area through the exercise of the 
                          rights conferred on them by this Agreement and through the judicial defence of these rights; 
                           
                          DETERMINED to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment and to ensure a prudent and rational 
                          utilization of natural resources on the basis, in particular, of the principle of sustainable development, as well as the principle 
                          that precautionary and preventive action should be taken; 
                           
                          DETERMINED to take, in the further development of rules, a high level of protection concerning health, safety and the 
                          environment as a basis; 
                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                           6
                          ( )    Austria, Finland and Sweden acceded the European Union on 1 January 1995. 
                           7
                          ( )    Austria, Finland and Sweden acceded the European Union on 1 January 1995. 
                           8
                          ( )    Reference to “the Swiss Confederation” deleted by the Adjusting Protocol.            
         Updated 1.8.2016    EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part   p. 6 
          
          
         NOTING the importance of the development of the social dimension, including equal treatment of men and women, in the 
         European Economic Area and wishing to ensure economic and social progress and to promote conditions for full 
         employment, an improved standard of living and improved working conditions within the European Economic Area ;
          
         DETERMINED to promote the interests of consumers and to strengthen their position in the market place, aiming at a high 
         level of consumer protection; 
          
         ATTACHED to the common objectives of strengthening the scientific and technological basis of European industry and of 
         encouraging it to become more competitive at the international level; 
          
         CONSIDERING that the conclusion of this Agreement shall not prejudge in any way the possibility of any EFTA State to 
         accede to the European Communities; 
          
         WHEREAS, in full deference to the independence of the courts, the objective of the Contracting Parties is to arrive at, and 
         maintain, a uniform interpretation and application of this Agreement and those provisions of Community legislation which 
         are substantially reproduced in this Agreement and to arrive at an equal treatment of individuals and economic operators as 
         regards the four freedoms and the conditions of competition; 
          
         WHEREAS this Agreement does not restrict the decision-making autonomy or the treaty-making power of the Contracting 
         Parties, subject to the provisions of this Agreement and the limitations set by public international law; 
          
         HAVE DECIDED to conclude the following Agreement: 
                            Updated 1.8.2016                                                     EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                                  p. 7 
                             
                             
                                                                                                      PART I 
                                                                   OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES 
                             
                             
                                                                                                          Article 1 
                            1.         The aim of this Agreement of association is to promote a continuous and balanced strengthening of trade and 
                                       economic relations between the Contracting Parties with equal conditionsf o competition, and the respect of the 
                                       same rules, with a view to creating a homogeneous European Economic Area, hereinafter referred to as the EEA. 
                             
                            2.         In order to attain the objectives set out in paragraph 1, the association shall entail, in accordance wth ti he provisions 
                                       of this Agreement : 
                             
                                       (a)         the free movement of goods; 
                                       (b)         the free movement of persons; 
                                       (c)         the free movement of services; 
                                       (d)         the free movement of capital; 
                                       (e)         the setting up of a system ensuring that competition is not distorted and t thahe rt ules thereon are equally 
                                                   respected; as well as 
                                       (f)         closer cooperation in other fields, such as research and development, the environment, education and social 
                                                   policy. 
                             
                             
                                                                                                          Article 2 
                            For the purposes of this Agreement : 
                             
                            (a)        the term "Agreement" means the main Agreement, its Protocols and Annexes as well as the acts referred to therein; 
                             
                                 9                                                      10
                            (b)( )     the term "EFTA States" means the ( ) Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein and the Kingdom of Norway; 
                             
                            (c)        the term "Contracting Parties" means, concerning the Community and the EC Member States, the Community and 
                                       the EC Member States, or the Community, or the EC Member States.  The meaning to be attributed to this 
                                       expression in each case is to be deduced from the relevant provisions of this Agreement and from the respective 
                                       competences of the Community and the EC Member States as they follow from the Treaty establishing the 
                                                                                      11
                                       European Economic Community ( ); 
                             
                                 12
                            (d)( )     the term "Act of Accession of 16 April 2003" shall mean the Act concerning the conditionsA ofcces sion of the 
                                       Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, 
                                       the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak 
                                       Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is foundeptd,ed i adon Athens on 
                                       16 April 2003; 
                             
                                 13
                            (e)( )     the term "Act of Accession of 25 April 2005" shall mean the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the 
                                       Republic of Bulgaria and Romania and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded, 
                                       adopted in Luxembourg on 25 April 2005; 
                             
                                14
                            (f)( )      
                                                                                       
                             9
                            ( )   As replaced by the Adjusting Protocol and subsequently by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement 
                                                                                                                        
                                  No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005.
                             10
                            ( )  Words "Republic of" deleted by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.10), 
                                  provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011. 
                             11
                            ( )  Words "and the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community" deleted  by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 
                                                                                                                                                                
                                  29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005.
                             12
                            ( )  Paragraph added by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally 
                                  applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005. 
                            13
                            ( )   Paragraph added by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.1), provisionally 
                                  applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011.      
                          Updated 1.8.2016                                                  EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                             p. 8 
                           
                           
                                     the term "Act of Accession of 9 December 2011" shall mean the "Act concerning the conditions of accession of the 
                                     Republic of Croatia and the adjustments to the Treaty on European Union, the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
                                     European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, signed at Brussels on 9 
                                     December 2011. 
                                                                                                    Article 3 
                          The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the 
                          obligations arising out of this Agreement. 
                           
                          They shall abstain from any measure which could jeopardize the attainment of the objectives of this Agreement. 
                           
                          Moreover, they shall facilitate cooperation within the framework of this Agreement. 
                           
                           
                                                                                                    Article 4 
                          Within the scope of application of this Agreement, and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein, any 
                          discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited. 
                           
                           
                                                                                                    Article 5 
                          A Contracting Party may at any time raise a matter of concern at the level of the EEA Joint Committee or the EEA Council 
                          according to the modalities laid down in Articles 92 (2) and 89 (2), respectively. 
                           
                           
                                                                                                    Article 6 
                          Without prejudice to future developments of case law, the provisions of this Agreement, in so far as they are identical in 
                          substance to corresponding rules of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community and the Treaty establishing 
                          the European Coal and Steel Community and to acts adopted in application of these two Treaties, shall, in their 
                          implementation and application, be interpreted in conformity with the relevant rulings of the Court of Justice of the 
                          European Communities given prior to the date of signature of this Agreement. 
                           
                           
                                                                                                    Article 7 
                          Acts referred to or contained in the Annexes to this Agreement or in decisions of the EEA Joint Committee shall be binding 
                          upon the Contracting Parties and be, or be made, part of their internal legal order as follows : 
                           
                          (a)        an act corresponding to an EEC regulation shall as such be made part of the internal legal order of the Contracting 
                                     Parties; 
                           
                          (b)        an act corresponding to an EEC directive shall leave to the authorities of the Contracting Parties the choice of form 
                                     and method of implementation. 
                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                           14
                          ( )    Paragraph added by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.1), 
                                 provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011, subsequently deleted andrep  laced by the 2014 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 
                                 170, 11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f. pending. 
                                  
                        Updated 1.8.2016                                             EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                      p. 9 
                         
                         
                                                                                        PART II 
                                                            FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS 
                         
                                                                                       CHAPTER 1 
                                                                                BASIC PRINCIPLES 
                         
                         
                                                                                            Article 8 
                        1.        Free movement of goods between the Contracting Parties shall be established in conformity with the provisions of 
                                  this Agreement.  
                         
                        2.        Unless otherwise specified, Articles 10 to 15, 19, 20 and 25 to 27 shall apply only to products originating in the 
                                  Contracting Parties. 
                         
                        3.        Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this Agreement shall apply only to: 
                         
                                  (a)        products falling within Chapters 25 to 97 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, 
                                             excluding the products listed in Protocol 2; 
                                   
                                  (b)        products specified in Protocol 3, subject to the specific arrangements set out in that Protocol .
                         
                         
                                                                                            Article 9 
                        1.        The rules of origin are set out in Protocol 4.  They are without prejudice to any international obligations which have 
                                  been, or may be, subscribed to by the Contracting Parties under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade .
                         
                        2.        With a view to developing the results achieved in this Agreement, the Contracting Parties will continue their efforts 
                                  in order further to improve and simplify all aspects of rules of origin and to increase cooperation in customs matters .
                         
                        3.        A first review will take place before the end of 1993.  Subsequent reviews will take place at twyoear- ly intervals.  
                                  On the basis of these reviews, the Contracting Parties undertake to decide on the appropriate measures to be 
                                  included in this Agreement. 
                         
                         
                                                                                           Article 10 
                        Customs duties on imports a  endxports, and any charges having equivalent effect, shall be prohibited between the 
                        Contracting Parties.  Without prejudice to the arrangements set out in Protocol 5, this shall also apply to customs duties of a 
                        fiscal nature. 
                         
                         
                                                                                           Article 11 
                        Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between the Contracting 
                        Parties. 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                           Article 12 
                        Quantitative restrictions on exports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between the Contracting 
                        Parties. 
                         
                         
                                                                                           Article 13 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 10 
               
               
              The provisions of Articles 11 and 12 shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit 
              justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals 
              or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; or the protection of 
              industrial and commercial property.  Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means ofra ary rbit
              discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Contracting Parties. 
               
               
                                                     Article 14 
              No Contracting Party shall impose, directly or indirectly, on the products of other Contracting Parties any internal taxationo f 
              any kind in excess of that imposed directly or indirectly on similar domestic products. 
               
              Furthermore, no Contracting Party shall impose on the products of other Contracting Parties any internal taxation of such a 
              nature as to afford indirect protection to other products. 
               
               
                                                     Article 15 
              Where products are exported to the territory of any Contracting Party, any repayment of internal taxation shall not exceed the 
              internal taxation imposed on them whether directly or indirectly. 
               
               
                                                     Article 16 
              1.    The Contracting Parties shall ensure that any State monopoly of a commercial character be adjusted so that no 
                    discrimination regarding the conditions under which goods are procured and marketed will exist between nationals 
                    of EC Member States and EFTA States. 
               
              2.    The provisions of this Article shall apply to any body through which the competent authorities of the Contracting 
                    Parties, in law or in fact, either directly or indirectly supervise, determine or appreciably influence imports or 
                    exports between Contracting Parties.  These provisions shalllik  ewise apply to monopolies delegated by the State to 
                    others.  
                                                          
                                                  CHAPTER 2 
                                 AGRICULTURAL AND FISHERY PRODUCTS 
               
               
                                                     Article 17 
              Annex I contains specific provisions and arrangements concerning veterinary and phytosanitary matters .
               
               
                                                     Article 18 
              Without prejudice to the specific arrangements governing trade in agricultural products, the Contracting Parties shall ensure 
              that the arrangements provided for in Articles 17 and 23 (a) and (b), as they apply to products other than those covered by 
              Article 8(3), are not compromised by other technical barriers to trade.  Article 13 shall apply. 
               
               
                                                     Article 19 
              1.    The Contracting Parties shall examine any difficulties that might arise in their trade in agricultural products and 
                    shall endeavour to seek appropriate solutions.  
               
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 11 
               
               
              2.    The Contracting Parties undertake to continue their efforts with a view to achieving progressive liberalization of 
                    agricultural trade. 
               
              3.    To this end, the Contracting Parties will carry out, before the end of 1993 and subsequently at two-yearly interval, s
                    reviews of the conditions of trade in agricultural products. 
               
              4.    In the light of the results of these reviews, within the framework of their respective agricultural policies and taking 
                    into account the results of the Uruguay Round, the Contracting Pasrt wieill decide, within the framework of this 
                    Agreement, on a preferential, bilateral or multilateral, reciprocal and mutually beneficial basis, on further reductions 
                    of any type of barriers to trade in the agricultural sector, including those resulting  fStraomte monopolies of a 
                    commercial character in the agricultural field. 
               
               
                                                     Article 20 
              Provisions and arrangements that apply to fish and other marine products are set out in Protocol 9 .
               
                                                  CHAPTER 3 
                             COOPERATION IN CUSTOMS-RELATED MATTERS  
                                         AND TRADE FACILITATION 
               
               
                                                     Article 21 
              1.    In order to facilitate trade between them, the Contracting Parties shall simplify border controls and formalities.  
                    Arrangements for this purpose are set out in Protocol 10. 
               
              2.    The Contracting Parties shall assist each othern c iustoms matters in order to ensure that customs legislation is 
                    correctly applied.  Arrangements for this purpose are set out in Protocol 11. 
               
              3.    The Contracting Parties shall strengthen and broaden cooperation with the aim of simplifying the proceduorr es f
                    trade in goods, in particular in the context of Community programmes, projects and actions aimed at trade 
                    facilitation, in accordance with the rules set out in Part VI. 
               
              4.    Notwithstanding Article 8(3), this Article shall apply to all products. 
               
               
                                                     Article 22 
              A Contracting Party which is considering the reduction of the effective level of its duties or charges having equivalent effcte 
              applicable to third countries benefiting from most-favoured-nation treatment, or which is considering the suspension of their 
              application, shall, as far as may be practicable, notify the EEA Joint Committee not later than thirty days before such 
              reduction or suspension comes into effect.  It shall take note of any representations by other Contracting Parties regarding 
              any distortions which might result there from. 
                                                          
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 12 
               
               
                                                  CHAPTER 4 
                                   OTHER RULES RELATING TO THE FREE 
                                            MOVEMENT OF GOODS 
               
               
                                                     Article 23 
              Specific provisions and arrangements are laid down in: 
               
              (a)   Protocol 12 and Annex II in relation to technical regulations, standards, testing and certification ;
               
              (b)   Protocol 47 in relation to the abolition of technical barriers to trade in wine; 
               
              (c)   Annex III in relation to product liability. 
               
              They shall apply to all products unless otherwise specified. 
               
               
                                                     Article 24 
              Annex IV contains specific provisions and arrangements concerning energy. 
               
               
                                                     Article 25 
              Where compliance with the provisions of Articles 10 and 12 leads to: 
               
              (a)   re-export towards a third country against which the exporting Contracting Party maintains, for the product 
                    concerned, quantitative export restrictions, export duties or measures or charges having equivalent effect; or 
               
              (b)   a serious shortage, or threat thereof, of a product essential to the exporting Contracting Party; 
               
              and where the situations referred to above give rise, or are likely to give rise, to major difficulties for the exporting 
              Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may take appropriate measures in accordance with the procedures set out in Article 
              113.  
               
               
                                                     Article 26 
              Anti-dumping measures, countervailing duties and measures against illicit commercial practices attributable to third 
              countries shall not be applied in relations between the Contracting Parties, unless otherwise specified in this Agreement.  
                                                          
                                                  CHAPTER 5 
                                        COAL AND STEEL PRODUCTS 
               
               
                                                     Article 27 
              Provisions and arrangements concerning coal and steel products are set out in Protocols 14 and2  5.  
                                                  PART III 
                                 FREE MOVEMENT OF PERSONS, 
                    Updated 1.8.2016                                 EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                      p. 13 
                     
                     
                                                      SERVICES AND CAPITAL 
                     
                                                                                 
                                                                       CHAPTER 1 
                                              WORKERS AND SELF-EMPLOYED PERSONS  
                     
                     
                                                                           Article 28 
                    1.      Freedom of movement for workers shall be secured among EC Member States and EFTA States. 
                     
                    2.      Such freedom of movement shall entail the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of 
                            EC Member States and EFTA States as regards employment, remuneration and other cononsdi ofti  work and 
                            employment. 
                     
                    3.      It shall entail the right, subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health: 
                     
                            (a)     to accept offers of employment actually made; 
                             
                            (b)     to move freely within the territory of EC Member States and EFTA States for this purpose; 
                             
                            (c)     to stay in the territory of an EC Member State or an EFTA State for the purpose of employment in 
                                    accordance with the provisions governing the employment of nationals of that State laid down by law, 
                                    regulation or administrative action; 
                             
                            (d)     to remain in the territory of an EC Member State or an EFTA State after having been employed there. 
                     
                    4.      The provisions of this Article shall not apply to employment in the public service.   
                     
                    5.      Annex V contains specific provisions on the free movement of workers. 
                     
                     
                                                                           Article 29 
                    In order to provide freedom of movement for workers and se-lefmployed persons, the Contracting Parties shall, in the field 
                    of social security, secure, as provided for in Annex VI, for workers and sf-eeml ployed persons and their dependants, in 
                    particular:  
                     
                    (a)     aggregation, for the purpose of acquiring and retaining the right to benefit and of calculating the amount of benefit, 
                            of all periods taken into account under the laws of the several countries; 
                     
                    (b)     payment of benefits to persons resident in the territories of Contracting Parties. 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                               Article 30 
                    In order to make it easier for persons to take up and pursue activities as workers and sel-femployed persons, the Contracting 
                    Parties shall take the necessary measures, as contained in Annex VII, concerning the mutual recognition of diplomas, 
                    certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications, and the coordination of the provisions laid down by law, regulat ion
                    or administrative action in the Contracting Parties concerning the taking up and pursuit of activities by workers and s-   elf
                    employed persons. 
                                                                                 
                                                                       CHAPTER 2 
                                                          RIGHT OF ESTABLISHMENT 
                     
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 14 
               
               
               
                                                     Article 31 
              1.    Within the framework of the provisions of this Agreement, there shall be no restrictions on the freedom of 
                    establishment of nationals of an EC Member State or an EFTA State in the territory of any other of these States.  
                    This shall also apply to the setting up of agencies, branches or subsidiaries by nationals of any EC Member State or 
                    EFTA State established in the territory of any of these States. 
               
                    Freedom of establishment shall include the right to take up and pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set 
                    up and manage undertakings, in particular companies or firms within the meaning of Article 34, second paragraph, 
                    under the conditions laid down for its own nationals by the law of the country where such establishment is effected, 
                    subject to the provisions of Chapter 4. 
                
              2.    Annexes VIII to XI contain specific provisions on the right of establishment. 
               
               
                                                     Article 32 
              The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply, so far as any given Contracting Party is concerned, to activities which in that 
              Contracting Party are connected, even occasionally, with the exercise of official authority. 
               
               
                                                     Article 33 
              The provisions of this Chapter and measures taken in pursuance thereof shall not prejudice the applicability of provisions 
              laid down by law, regulation or administrative action providing for special treatment for foreign nationals on grounds of 
              public policy, public security or public health. 
               
               
                                                     Article 34 
              Companies or firms formed in accordance with the law of an EC Member State or an EFTA State and having their registered 
              office, central administration or principal place of business within the territory of the Contracting Parties shall, for the 
              purposes of this Chapter, be treated in the same way as natural persons who are nationals of EC Member States or EFTA 
              States.  
               
              'Companies or firms' means companies or firms constituted under civil or commercial law, including cooperative societies, 
              and other legal persons governed by public or private law, save for those which are non-profit-making. 
               
               
                                                     Article 35 
              The provisions of Article 30 shall apply to the matters covered by this Chapter. 
                         Updated 1.8.2016                                                EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                         p. 15 
                          
                          
                                                                                            CHAPTER 3 
                                                                                             SERVICES 
                          
                          
                                                                                                 Article 36 
                         1.         Within the framework of the provisions of this Agreement, there shall be no restrictions on freedom to provide 
                                    services within the territory of the Contracting Parties in respect of nationals of EC Member States and EFTA States 
                                    who are established in an EC Member State or an EFTA State other than that of the person for whom the services 
                                    are intended. 
                          
                         2.         Annexes IX to XI contain specific provisions on the freedom to provide services. 
                          
                          
                                                                                                 Article 37 
                         Services shall be considered to be 'services' within the meaning of this Agreement where they are normally provided for 
                         remuneration, in so far as they are not governed by the provisions relating tfro eedom of movement for goods, capital and 
                         persons. 
                          
                         'Services' shall in particular include : 
                          
                         (a)        activities of an industrial character; 
                         (b)        activities of a commercial character; 
                         (c)        activities of craftsmen; 
                         (d)        activities of the professions. 
                          
                         Without prejudice to the provisions of Chapte r2, the person providing a service may, in order to do so, temporarily pursue 
                         his activity in the State where the service is provided, under the same conditions as are imposed by that State on its own 
                         nationals. 
                          
                          
                                                                                                 Article 38 
                         Freedom to provide services in the field of transport shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 6. 
                          
                          
                                                                                                 Article 39 
                         The provisions of Articles 30 and 32 to 34 shall apply to the matters covered by this Chapter.  
                          
                                                                                            CHAPTER 4 
                                                                                              CAPITAL 
                          
                          
                                                                                                 Article 40 
                         Within the framework of the provisions of this Agreement, there shall be no restrictions between the Contracting Parties on 
                         the movement of capital belonging to persons resident in EC Member States or EFTA States and no discrimination based on 
                         the nationality or on the place of residence of the parties or on the place where such capital is invested.  Annex XII contains 
                         the provisions necessary to implement this Article. 
                          
                          
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 16 
               
               
                                                     Article 41 
              Current payments connected with the movement of goods, persons, services or capital between Contracting Parties within 
              the framework of the provisions of this Agreement shall be free of all restrictions. 
               
               
                                                     Article 42 
              1.    Where domestic rules governing the capital market and the credit system are applied to the movements of capital 
                    liberalized in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, this shall be done in a non-discriminatory manner. 
               
              2.    Loans for the direct or indirect financing of an EC Member State or an EFTA State or its regional or local 
                    authorities shall not be issedu  or placed in other EC Member States or EFTA States unless the States concerned 
                    have reached agreement thereon. 
               
               
                                                     Article 43 
              1.    Where differences between the exchange rules of EC Member States and EFTA States could lead persons resident 
                    in one of these taStes to use the freer transfer facilities within the territory of the Contracting Parties which are 
                    provided for in Article 40 in order to evade the rules of one of these States concerning the movement of capital to or 
                    from third countries, the Contracting Party concerned may take appropriate measures to overcome these difficulties. 
               
              2.    If movements of capital lead to disturbances in the functioning of the capital market in any EC Member State or 
                    EFTA State, the Contracting Party concerned may take protective measures in the field of capital movements. 
               
              3.    If the competent authorities of a Contracting Party make an alteration in the rate of exchange which seriously 
                    distorts conditions of competition, the other Contracting Parties may take, for a strictly limited period, the necessary 
                    measures in order to counter the consequences of such alteration.  
               
              4.    Where an EC Member State or an EFTA State is in difficulties, or is seriously threatened with difficulties, as 
                    regards its balance of payments either as a result of an overall disequilibrium in its balance of payments, or as a 
                    result of the type of currency at its disposal, and where such difficulties are liable in particular to jeopardize the 
                    functioning of this Agreement, the Contracting Party concerned may take protective measures. 
               
               
                                                     Article 44 
              The Community, on the one hand, and the EFTA States, on the other, shall apply their internal procedures, as provided for in 
              Protocol 18, to implement the provisions of Article 43. 
               
               
                                                     Article 45 
              1.    Decisions, opinions and recommendations related to the measures laid down in Article 43 shall be notified to the 
                    EEA Joint Committee. 
               
              2.    All measures shall be the subject of prior consultations and exchange of information within the EEA Joint 
                    Committee. 
               
              3.    In the situation referred to in Article 43(2), the Contracting Party concerned may, however, on the grounds of 
                    secrecy and urgency take the measures, where this proves necessary, without prior consultations and exchange of 
                    information.  
               
              4.    In the situation referred to in Article 43(4), where a sudden crisis in the balance of payments occurs and the 
                    procedures set out in paragraph 2 cannot be followed, the Contracting Party concerned may, as a precaution, take 
                    the necessary protective measures. Such measures must cause the least possible disturbance in the functioning of 
                    this Agreement and must not be wider in scope than is strictly necessary to remedy the sudden difficulties which 
                    have arisen. 
               
              5.    When measures are taken in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4, notice thereof shall be given at the latest by the 
                    date of their entry into force, and the exchange of information and consultations as well as the notifications referred 
                    to in paragraph 1 shall take place as soon as possible thereafter. 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 17 
               
               
                                                          
                                                  CHAPTER 5 
                                        ECONOMIC AND MONETARY  
                                           POLICY COOPERATION 
               
               
                                                     Article 46 
              The Contracting Parties shall exchange views and information concerning the implementation of this Agreement and the 
              impact of the integration on economic activities and on the conduct of economic and monetary policies.  Furthermore, they 
              may discuss macro-economic situations, policies and prospects.  This exchange of views and information shall take place on 
              a non-binding basis. 
               
                                                          
                                                  CHAPTER 6 
                                                  TRANSPORT 
               
               
                                                     Article 47 
              1.    Articles 48 to 52 shall apply to transport by rail, road and inland waterway.  
               
              2.    Annex XIII contains specific provisions on all modes of transport. 
               
               
                                                     Article 48 
              1.    The provisions of an EC Member State or an EFTA State, relative to transport by rail, road and inland waterway and 
                    not covered by Annex XIII, shall not be made less favourable in their direct or indirect effect on carriers of other 
                    States as compared with carriers who are nationals of that State. 
               
              2.    Any Contracting Party deviating from the principle laid down in paragraph 1 shall notify the EEA Joint Committee 
                    thereof.  The other Contracting Parties which do not accept the deviation may take corresponding countermeasures .
               
               
                                                     Article 49 
              Aid shall be compatible with this Agreement if it meets the needs of coordination of transport or if it represents 
              reimbursement for the discharge of certain obligations inherent in the concept of a public service .
               
               
                                                     Article 50 
              1.    In the case of transport within the territory of the Contracting Parties, there shall be no discrimination which takes 
                    the form of carriers charging different rates and imposing different conditions for the carriage of the same goods 
                    over the same transport links on grounds of the country of origin or of destination of the goods in question. 
               
              2.    The competent authority according to Part VII shall, acting on its own initiative or on application by an EC Member 
                    State or an EFTA State, investigate any cases of discrimination falling within this Article and take the necessary 
                    decisions within the framework of its internal rules. 
               
                                                          
                                                     Article 51 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 18 
               
               
              1.    The imposition, in respect of transport operations carried out within the territory of the Contracting Parties, of rates 
                    and conditions involving any element of support or protection in the interest of one or more particular undertakings 
                    or industries, shall be prohibited unless authorized by the competent authority referred to in Article 50(2) .
               
              2.    The competent authority shall, acting on its own initiative or on application by an EC Member State or an EFTA 
                    State, examine the rates and conditions referred to in paragraph 1, taking account in particular of the requirements of 
                    an appropriate regional economic policy, the needs of underdeveloped areas and the problems of areas seriously 
                    affected by political circumstances, on the one hand, and o fthe effects of such rates and conditions on competition 
                    between the different modes of transport, on the other. 
               
                    The competent authority shall take the necessary decisions within the framework of its internal rules. 
               
              3.    The prohibition provided for in paragraph 1 shall not apply to tariffs fixed to meet competition.  
               
               
                                                     Article 52 
              Charges or dues in respect of the crossing of frontiers which are charged by a carrier in addition to transport rates shall not 
              exceed a reasonable level after taking the costs actually incurred thereby into account.  The Contracting Parties shall 
              endeavour to reduce these costs progressively. 
               
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 19 
               
               
                                                  PART IV 
                       COMPETITION AND OTHER COMMON RULES 
               
                                                          
                                                  CHAPTER 1 
                                  RULES APPLICABLE TO UNDERTAKINGS 
               
               
                                                     Article 53 
              1.    The following shall be prohibited as incompatible with the functioning of this Agreement: all agreements between 
                    undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices which may affect trade between 
                    Contracting Parties and which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition 
                    within the territory covered by this Agreement, and in particular those which: 
               
                    (a)   directly or indirectly fix purchase or selling prices or any other trading conditions; 
                     
                    (b)   limit or control production, markets, technical development, or investment; 
                     
                    (c)   share markets or sources of supply; 
                     
                    (d)   apply dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a 
                          competitive disadvantage; 
                     
                    (e)   make the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations 
                          which, by their nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such 
                          contracts. 
               
              2.    Any agreements or decisions prohibited pursuant to this Article shall be automatically void. 
               
              3.    The provisions of paragraph 1 may, however, be declared inapplicable in the case of :
                     
                    -     any agreement or category of agreements between undertakings; 
                     
                    -     any decision or category of decisions by associations of undertakings; 
                     
                    -     any concerted practice or category of concerted practices; 
               
                    which contributes to improving the production or distribution of goods or to promoting technical or economic 
                    progress, while allowing consumers a fair share of the resulting benefit, and which does not: 
               
                    (a)   impose on the undertakings concerned restrictions wch ahi re not indispensable to the attainment of these 
                          objectives; 
                     
                    (b)   afford such undertakings the possibility of eliminating competition in respect of a substantial part of the 
                          products in question. 
                                                          
                                                          
                                                     Article 54 
              Any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the territory covered by this Agreement or in a 
              substantial part of it shall be prohibited as incompatible with the functioning of this Agreement in so far as it may affect 
              trade between Contracting Parties. 
               
              Such abuse may, in particular, consist in: 
               
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 20 
               
               
              (a)   directly or indirectly imposing unfair purchase or selling prices or other unfair trading conditions; 
               
              (b)   limiting production, markets or technical development to the prejudice of consumers; 
               
              (c)   applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a 
                    competitive disadvantage; 
               
              (d)   making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations which, 
                    by their nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts. 
               
               
                                                     Article 55 
              1.    Without prejudice to the provisions giving effect to Articles 53 and 54 as contained in Protoc ol21 and Annex XIV 
                    of this Agreement, the EC Commission and the EFTA Surevillance Authority provided for in Article 108(1) shall 
                    ensure the application of the principles laid down in Articles 53 and 54. 
               
                    The competent surveillance authority, as provided for in Article 56, shall investigate cases of suspected 
                    infringement of these principles, on its own initiative, or on application by a State within the respective territory or 
                    by the other surveillance authority.  The competent surveillance authority shall carry out these investigations in 
                    cooperation with the competent national authorities in the respective territory and in cooperation with the other 
                    surveillance authority, which shall give it its assistance in accordance with its internal rules. 
               
                    If it finds that there has been an infringement, it shall propose appropriate measures to bring it to an end. 
               
              2.    If the infringement is not brought to an end, the competent surveillance authority shall record such infringement of 
                    the principles in a reasoned decision. 
               
                    The competent surveillance authority may publish its decision and authorize States within the respective territory to 
                    take the measures, the conditions and details of which it shall determine, needed to remedy the situation.  It may 
                    also request the other surveillance authority to authorize States within the respective territory to take such measures. 
               
                                                          
                                                     Article 56 
              1.    Individual cases falling under Article 53 shall be decided upon by the surveillance authorities in accordance with the 
                    following provisions: 
               
                    (a)   individual cases where only trade between EFTA States isf afected shall be decided upon by the EFTA 
                          Surveillance Authority; 
                     
                    (b)   without prejudice to subparagraph (c), the EFTA Surveillance Authority decides, as provided for in the 
                          provisions set out in Article 58, Protocol 21 and the rules adopted for its impleemntation, Protocol 23 and 
                          Annex XIV, on cases where the turnover of the undertakings concerned in the territory of the EFTA States 
                          equals 33 per cent or more of their turnover in the territory covered by this Agreement; 
                     
                    (c)   the EC Commission decides on the other cases as well as on cases under (b) where trade between EC 
                          Member States is affected, taking into account the provisions set out in Article 58, Protocol 21, Protocol 23 
                          and Annex XIV. 
               
              2.    Individual cases falling under Article 54 shall be decided upon by the surveillance authority in the territory of which 
                    a dominant position is found to exist.  The rules set out in paragr1(ab)ph a  nd (c) shall apply only if dominance 
                    exists within the territories of both surveillance authorities. 
               
              3.    Individual cases falling under subparagraph (c) of paragraph 1, whose effects on trade between EC Member States 
                    or on competition within the Community are not appreciable, shall be decided upon by the EFTA Surveillance 
                    Authority. 
               
              4.    The terms 'undertaking' and 'turnover' are, for the purposes of this Article, defined in Protocol 22.  
               
                                                          
                                                     Article 57 
                         Updated 1.8.2016                                             EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                                      p. 21 
                          
                          
                         1.        Concentrations the control of which is provided for in paragraph 2 and which create or strengthen a dominant 
                                   position as a result of which effective competition would be sniigficantly impeded within the territory covered by 
                                   this Agreement or a substantial part of it, shall be declared incompatible with this Agreement. 
                          
                         2.        The control of concentrations falling under paragraph 1 shall be carried out by: 
                          
                                   (a)       the EC Commission in cases falling under Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 in accordance with that 
                                             Regulation and in accordance with Protocols 21 and 24 and Annex XIV to this Agreement.  The EC 
                                             Commission shall, subject to the review of the EC Court of Justice, have sole competence to take decisions 
                                             on these cases; 
                                    
                                    (b)      the EFTA Surveillance Authority in cases not falling under subparagraph (a) where the relevant thresholds 
                                             set out in Annex XIV are fulfilled in the territory of the EFTA States in accordance with Protocols 21 and 
                                             24 and Annex XIV.  This is without prejudice to the competence of EC Member States.  
                          
                                                                                                     
                                                                                             Article 58 
                         With a view to developing and maintaining a uniform surveillance throughout the European Economic Area in the field of 
                         competition and to promoting a homogeneous implementation, application and ientatetiroprn of the provisions of this 
                         Agreement to this end, the competent authorities shall cooperate in accordance with the provisions set out in Protocols 23 
                         and 24. 
                          
                          
                                                                                             Article 59 
                         1.        In the case of public undertakings and undertakings to which EC Member Sesta ot r EFTA States grant special or 
                                   exclusive rights, the Contracting Parties shall ensure that there is neither enacted nor maintained in force any 
                                   measure contrary to the rules contained in this Agreement, in particular to those rules provided for in Arclties 4 and 
                                   53 to 63. 
                          
                         2.        Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or having the character of a 
                                   revenue-producing monopoly shall be subject to the rules contained in this Agreement, in particular to the rules on 
                                   competition, in so far as the application of such rules does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the 
                                   particular tasks assigned to them.  The development of trade must not be affected to such an extent as would be 
                                   contrary to the interests of the Contracting Parties. 
                          
                         3.        The EC Commission as well as the EFTA Surveillance Authority shall ensure within their respective competence 
                                   the application of the provisions of this Article and shall, where necessary, address appropriate measures to the 
                                   States falling within their respective territory. 
                          
                          
                                                                                             Article 60 
                         Annex XIV contains specific provisions giving effect to the principles set out in Articles 53, 54, 57 and 59. 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 22 
               
               
                                                  CHAPTER 2 
                                                   STATE AID 
               
               
                                                     Article 61 
              1.    Save as otherwise provided in this Agreement, any aid granted by EC Member States, EFTA States or through State 
                    resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by favouring certain 
                    undertakings or the production of certain goods shall, in so far as it affects tradetw beeen Contracting Parties, be 
                    incompatible with the functioning of this Agreement. 
               
              2.    The following shall be compatible with the functioning of this Agreement: 
               
                    (a)   aid having a social character, granted to individual consumers, provided that such aid is granted without 
                          discrimination related to the origin of the products concerned; 
                     
                    (b)   aid to make good the damage caused by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences; 
                     
                    (c)   aid granted to the economy of certain areas of the Federal Republic of Germany affected by the division of 
                          Germany, in so far as such aid is required in order to compensate for the economic disadvantages caused by 
                          that division. 
                     
              3.    The following may be considered to be compatible with the functioning of this Agreement: 
                     
                    (a)   aid to promote the economic development of areas where the standard of living is abnormally low or where 
                          there is serious underemployment; 
                     
                    (b)   aid to promote the execution of an important project of common European interest or to remedy a serious 
                          disturbance in the economy of an EC Member State or an EFTA State; 
                     
                    (c)   aid to facilitate the development of certain economic activities or of certain economic areas, where such aid 
                          does not adversely affect trading conditions to an extent contrary to the common interest; 
                     
                    (d)   such other categories of aid as may be specified by the EEA Joint Committee in accordance with Part VII. 
               
                                                          
                                                     Article 62 
               
              1.    All existing systems of State aid in the territory of the Contracting Parties, as well as any plans to grant or alter State 
                    aid, shall be subject to constant review as to their compatibility with Article 61.  This review shall be carried out: 
               
                    (a)   as regards the EC Member States, by the EC Commission according to the rules laid down in Article 93 of 
                          the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community;  
                     
                    (b)   as regards the EFTA States, by the EFTA Surveillance Authority according to the rules set out in an 
                          agreement between the EFTA States establishing the EFTA Surveillance Authority which is entrusted with 
                          the powers and functions laid down in Protocol 26. 
               
              2.    With a view to ensuring a uniform surveillance in the field of State aid throughout the territory covered by this 
                    Agreement, the EC Commission and the EFTA Surveillance Authority shall cooperate in accordance with the 
                    provisions set out in Protocol 27. 
               
               
                                                     Article 63 
              Annex XV contains specific provisions on State aid. 
               
               
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 23 
               
               
                                                     Article 64 
              1.    If one of the surveillance authorities considers that the implementation by the other surveillance authority of 
                    Articles 61 and 62 of this Agreement and Article 5 of Protocol 14 is not in conformity with the maintenance of 
                    equal conditions of competition within the territory covered by this Agreement, exchange  ofviews shall be held 
                    within two weeks according to the procedure of Protocol 27, paragraph (f). 
               
                    If a commonly agreed solution has not been found by the end of this two-week period, the competent authority of 
                    the affected Contracting Party may immediately adopt appropriate interim measures in order to remedy the resulting 
                    distortion of competition. 
               
                    Consultations shall then be held in the EEA Joint Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable 
                    solution. 
               
                    If within three months the EEA Joint Committee has not been able to find such a solution, and if the practice in 
                    question causes, or threatens to cause, distortion of competition affecting trade between the Contracting Parties, the 
                    interim measures may be replaced by definitive measures, strictly necessary to offset the effect of such distortion. 
                    Priority shall be given to such measures that will least disturb the functioning of the EEA. 
               
              2.    The provisions of this Article will also apply to State monopolies, which are established after the date o sigf nature 
                    of the Agreement. 
               
                                                  CHAPTER 3 
                                           OTHER COMMON RULES 
               
               
                                                     Article 65 
              1.    Annex XVI contains specific provisions and arrangements concerning procurement which, unless otherwise 
                    specified, shall apply to all products and to services as specified. 
               
              2.    Protocol 28 and Annex XVII contain specific provisions and arrangements concerning intellectual, industrial and 
                    commercial property, which, unless otherwise specified, shall apply to all products and services. 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 24 
               
               
                                                   PART V 
                 HORIZONTAL PROVISIONS RELEVANT TO THE FOUR 
                                                FREEDOMS 
               
               
                                                  CHAPTER 1 
                                                SOCIAL POLICY 
               
               
                                                     Article 66 
              The Contracting Parties agree upon the need to promote improved working conditions and an improved standard of living 
              for workers. 
               
               
                                                     Article 67 
              1.    The Contracting Parties shall pay particular attention to encouraging improvements, especially in the working 
                    environment, as regards the health and safety of workers.  In order to help achieve this objective, minimum 
                    requirements shall be applied for gradual implementation, having regard to the conditions achnndical t re ules 
                    obtaining in each of the Contracting Parties.  Such minimum requirements shall not prevent any Contracting Party 
                    from maintaining or introducing more stringent measures for the protection of working conditions compatible with 
                    this Agreement. 
               
              2.    Annex XVIII specifies the provisions to be implemented as the minimum requirements referred to in paragraph 1. 
               
               
                                                     Article 68 
              In the field of labour law, the Contracting Parties shall introduce the measures necessary to ensure the good functioning of 
              this Agreement.  These measures are specified  in Annex XVIII. 
               
               
                                                     Article 69 
              1.    Each Contracting Party shall ensure and maintain t heapplication of the principle that men and women should 
                    receive equal pay for equal work. 
               
                    For the purposes of this Article, 'pay' means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other 
                    consideration, whether in cash or in kind, which the wor rkeceier ves, directly or indirectly, in respect of his 
                    employment from his employer. 
               
                     Equal pay without discrimination based on sex means: 
               
                    (a)   that pay for the same work at piece rates shall be calculated on the basis of the same unit of measurement; 
                     
                    (b)   that pay for work at time rates shall be the same for the same job. 
               
              2.    Annex XVIII contains specific provisions for the implementation of paragraph 1. 
               
               
                                                     Article 70 
                     Updated 1.8.2016                                      EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                            p. 25 
                      
                      
                     The Contracting Parties shall promote the principle of equal treatment for men and women b yimplementing the provisions 
                     specified in Annex XVIII. 
                      
                      
                                                                                 Article 71 
                     The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to promote the dialogue between management and labour at European level. 
                      
                                                                             CHAPTER 2 
                                                                 CONSUMER PROTECTION 
                      
                      
                                                                                 Article 72 
                     Annex XIX contains provisions on consumer protection. 
                      
                                                                             CHAPTER 3 
                                                                          ENVIRONMENT 
                      
                      
                                                                                 Article 73 
                     1.        Action by the Contracting Parties relating to the environment shall have the following objectives: 
                      
                               (a)      to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment; 
                                
                               (b)      to contribute towards protecting human health;  
                                
                               (c)      to ensure a prudent and rational utilization of natural resources. 
                      
                     2.        Action by the Contracting Parties relating to the environment shall be based on the principles that preventive action 
                               should be taken, that environmental damage should as a priority be rectified at source, and that the polluter should 
                               pay.  Environmental protection requirements shall be a component of the Contracting Parties' other policies .
                      
                      
                                                                                 Article 74 
                     Annex XX contains the specific provisions on protective measures which shall apply pursuant to Article 73. 
                      
                      
                                                                                 Article 75 
                     The protective measures referred to in Article74 s     hall not prevent any Contracting Party from maintaining or introducing 
                     more stringent protective measures compatible with this Agreement. 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 26 
               
               
                                                  CHAPTER 4 
                                                  STATISTICS 
               
               
                                                     Article 76 
              1.    The Contracting Parties shall ensure the production and dissemination of coherent and comparable statistical 
                    information for describing and monitoring all relevant economic, social and environmental aspects of the EEA. 
               
              2.    To this end the Contracting Parties shall develop and use harmonized methods, definitions and classifications as 
                    well as common programmes and procedures organizing statistical work at appropriate administrative levels and 
                    duly observing the need for statistical confidentiality. 
               
              3.    Annex XXI contains specific provisions on statistics. 
               
              4.    Protocol 30 contains specific provisions on the organization of cooperation in the field of statistics .
               
                                                  CHAPTER 5 
                                                COMPANY LAW 
               
               
                                                     Article 77 
              Annex XXII contains specific provisions on company law. 
                                                          
                                                  PART VI 
                     COOPERATION OUTSIDE THE FOUR FREEDOMS 
               
               
                                                     Article 78 
              The Contracting Parties shall strengthen and broaden cooperation in the framework of the Community's activities in the 
              fields of: 
               
              -     research and technological development, 
              -     information services, 
              -     the environment, 
              -     education, training and youth, 
              -     social policy, 
              -     consumer protection, 
              -     small and medium-sized enterprises, 
              -     tourism,  
              -     the audiovisual sector, and 
              -     civil protection, 
               
              in so far as these matters are not regulated under the provisions of other Parts of this Agreement. 
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 27 
               
               
                                                     Article 79 
              1.    The Contracting Parties shall strengthen the dialogue between them by all appropriate means, in particular through 
                    the procedures provided for in Part VII, wthi a view to identifying areas and activities where closer cooperation 
                    could contribute to the attainment of their common objectives in the fields referred to in Article 78. 
               
              2.    They shall, in particular, exchange information and, at the request of a Contarcting Party, hold consultations within 
                    the EEA Joint Committee in respect of plans or proposals for the establishment or amendment of framework 
                    programmes, specific programmes, actions and projects in the fields referred to in Article 78. 
               
              3.    Part VII shall apply mutatis mutandis with regard to this Part whenever the latter or P3ro1t socopleci  fically 
                    provides therefor. 
               
               
                                                     Article 80 
              The cooperation provided for in Article 78 shall normally take one of the following forms :
               
              -     participation by EFTA States in EC framework programmes, specific programmes, projects or other actions; 
               
              -     establishment of joint activities in specific areas, which may include concertation or coordination of activities, 
                    fusion of existing activities and establishment of ad hoc joint activities; 
               
              -     the formal and informal exchange or provision of information; 
               
              -     common efforts to encourage certain activities throughout the territory of the Contracting Parties; 
               
              -     parallel legislation, where appropriate, of identical or similar content; 
               
              -     coordination, where this is of mutual interest, of efforts and activities via, or in the context of, international 
                    organizations, and of cooperation with third countries. 
               
               
                                                     Article 81 
              Where cooperation takes the form of participation by EFTA States in an EC framework programme, specific programme, 
              project or other action, the following principles shall apply: 
               
              (a)   The EFTA States shall have access to all parts of a programme. 
               
              (b)   The status of the EFTA States in the committees whichis ast thes EC Commission in the management or 
                    development of a Community activity to which EFTA States may be contributing financially by virtue of their 
                    participation shall take full account of that contribution. 
               
              (c)   Decisions by the Community, other than those relating to the general budget of the Community, which affect 
                    directly or indirectly a framework programme, specific programme, project or other action, in which EFTA States 
                    participate by a decision under this Agreement, shall be subject to the prsovionsi  of Article 79(3).  The terms and 
                    conditions of the continued participation in the activity in question may be reviewed by the EEA Joint Committee in 
                    accordance with Article 86. 
               
              (d)   At the project level, institutions, undertakings, organizations and nationals of EFTA States shall have the same 
                    rights and obligations in the Community programme or other action in question as those applicable to partner 
                    institutions, undertakings, organizations and nationals of EC Member States.  The same shall aappltis y mut
                    mutandis to participants in exchanges between EC Member States and EFTA States, under the activity in question. 
               
              (e)   EFTA States, their institutions, undertakings, organizations and nationals shall have the same rights and obligations 
                    with regard to dissemination, evaluation and exploitation of results as those applicable to EC Member States, their 
                    institutions, undertakings, organizations and nationals. 
               
              (f)   The Contracting Parties undertake, in accordance with their respective rules and regulat  tioo fns,acilitate the 
                    movement of participants in the programme and other action to the extent necessary. 
               
                                                     Article 82 
                    Updated 1.8.2016                                  EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                        p. 28 
                     
                     
                    1.       When the cooperation envisaged under the present Part involves a financial participation of the EFTA States, this 
                             participation shall take one of the following forms: 
                              
                             (a)     The contribution of the EFTA States, arising from their participation in Community activities, shall be 
                                     calculated proportionally: 
                     
                                     -        to the commitment appropriations; and 
                                      
                                     -        to the payment appropriations; 
                     
                                     entered each year for the Community in the general budget of the Community for each budgetary line 
                                     corresponding to the activities in question. 
                              
                                     The 'proportionality factor' determining the participation of the EFTA States shall be the sum of the ratios 
                                     between, on the one hand, the gross domestic product at market prices of each of the EFTA States and, on 
                                     the other hand, the sum of the gross domestic products at market prices of the EC Member States and of 
                                     that EFTA State.  This factor shall be calculated, for eachudg b etary year, on the basis of the most recent 
                                     statistical data. 
                              
                                     The amount of the contribution of the EFTA States shall be additional, both in commitment appropriations 
                                     and in payment appropriations, to the amounts entered for the Community in the geanel budgr      et on each 
                                     line corresponding to the activities concerned.  
                              
                                     The contributions to be paid each year by the EFTA States shall be determined on the basis of the payment 
                                     appropriations. 
                              
                                     Commitments entered into by the Community prior to the entry into force, on the basis of this Agreement, 
                                     of the participation of the EFTA States in the activities in questionas -  well as the payments which result 
                                     from this - shall give rise to no contribution on the part of the EFTA States. 
                                      
                                     (b)      The financial contribution of EFTA States deriving from their participation in certain projects or 
                                              other activities shall be based on the principle that each Contracting Party shall cover its own costs, 
                                              with an appropriate contribution which shall be fixed by the EEA Joimntitte Ceom to the 
                                              Community's overhead costs. 
                                      
                                     (c)      The EEA Joint Committee shall take the necessary decisions concerning the contribution of the 
                                              Contracting Parties to the costs of the activity in question. 
                     
                    2.       The detailed provisions for the implementation of this Article are set out in Protocol 32. 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 83 
                    Where cooperation takes the form of an exchange of information between public authorities, the EFTA States shall have the 
                    same rights to receive, and obligations to provide, information as EC Meatmesbe,r s Sutbject to the requirements of 
                    confidentiality, which shall be fixed by the EEA Joint Committee. 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 84 
                    Provisions governing cooperation in specific fields are set out in Protocol 31. 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 85 
                    Unless otherwise provided for in Protocol 31, cooperation already established between the Community and individual EFTA 
                    States in the fields referred to in Article 78 on the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall thereafter be governed by 
                    the relevant provisions of this Part and of Protocol 31. 
                     
                                                                            Article 86 
                    Updated 1.8.2016                                  EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                        p. 29 
                     
                     
                    The EEA Joint Committee shall, in accordance with Part VII, take all decisions necessary for the implementation of Articles 
                    78 to 85 and measures derived therefrom, which may include, inter alia, supplementing and amending the provisions of 
                    Protocol 31, as well as adopting any transitional arrangements required by way of implementation of Article 85. 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 87 
                    The Contracting Parties shall take the necessary steps to develop, strengthen or broaden cooperation in the framework of the 
                    Community's activities in fields not listed in Article 78, where such cooperation is considered likely to contribute to the 
                    attainment of the objectives of this Agreement, or is otherwise deemed by the Contracting Parties to be of mutual interest.  
                    Such steps may include the amendment of Article 78 by the addition of new fields to those listed therein. 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 88 
                    Without prejudice to provisions of other Parts of this Agreement, the provisions of this Part shall not preclude the possibiityl  
                    for any Contracting Party to prepare, adopt and implement measures independently. 
                                                                                   
                                                                        PART VII 
                                                  INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
                     
                     
                                                                        CHAPTER 1 
                                                  THE STRUCTURE OF THE ASSOCIATION 
                                                                                   
                                                                           Section 1 
                                                                     The EEA Council 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 89 
                    1.       An EEA Council is hereby established.  It shall, in particular, be responsible for giving the political impetus in the 
                             implementation of this Agreement and laying down the general guidelines for the EEA Joint Committee .
                     
                             To this end, the EEA Council shall assess the overall functioning and the development of the Agreement.  It shall 
                             take the political decisions leading to amendments of the Agreement. 
                     
                    2.       The Contracting Parties, as to the Community and the EC Member States in their respective fields of competence, 
                             may, after having discussed it in the EEA Joint Committe ore di,  rectly in exceptionally urgent cases, raise in the 
                             EEA Council any issue giving rise to a difficulty. 
                     
                    3.       The EEA Council shall by decision adopt its rules of procedure. 
                     
                     
                                                                            Article 90 
                    1.       The EEA Council shall consist of the members of the Council ofhe t European Communities and members of the 
                             EC Commission, and of one member of the Government of each of the EFTA States. 
                     
                             Members of the EEA Council may be represented in accordance with the conditions to be laid down in its rules of 
                             procedure. 
                     
                    2.       Decisions by the EEA Council shall be taken by agreement between the Community, on the one hand, and the 
                             EFTA States, on the other. 
                     
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 30 
               
               
               
                                                     Article 91 
              1.    The office of President of the EEA Council shall be held alternately, for a period of six months, by a member of the 
                    Council of the European Communities and a member of the Government of an EFTA State. 
               
              2.    The EEA Council shall be convened twice a year by its President.  The EEA Council shall also meet whenever 
                    circumstances so require, in accordance with its rules of procedure. 
                                                          
                                                          
                                                    Section 2 
                                            The EEA Joint Committee 
               
               
                                                     Article 92 
              1.    An EEA Joint Committee is hereby established.  It shall ensure the effective implementation and operation of this 
                    Agreement.  To this end, it shall carry out exchanges of views and inforonm anatid take decisions in the cases 
                    provided for in this Agreement. 
               
              2.    The Contracting Parties, as to the Community and the EC Member States in their respective fields of competence, 
                    shall hold consultations in the EEA Joint Committee on any point of ranelce tev o the Agreement giving rise to a 
                    difficulty and raised by one of them. 
               
              3.    The EEA Joint Committee shall by decision adopt its rules of procedure. 
               
               
                                                     Article 93 
              1.    The EEA Joint Committee shall consist of representatives of the Contracting Parties. 
               
              2.    The EEA Joint Committee shall take decisions by agreement between the Community, on the one hand, and the 
                    EFTA States speaking with one voice, on the other. 
               
               
                                                     Article 94 
              1.    The office of President of the EEA Joint Committee shall be held alternately,  afo per riod of six months, by the 
                    representative of the Community, i.e. the EC Commission, and the representative of one of the EFTA States. 
               
              2.    In order to fulfil its functions, the EEA Joint Committee shall meet, in principle, at least once a month.  It sahll also 
                    meet on the initiative of its President or at the request of one of the Contracting Parties in accordance with its rules 
                    of procedure. 
               
              3.    The EEA Joint Committee may decide to establish any subcommittee or working group to assist it in carrying out its 
                    tasks.  The EEA Joint Committee shall in its rules of procedure lay down the composition and mode of operation of 
                    such subcommittees and working groups.  Their tasks shall be determined by the EEA Joint Committee in each 
                    individual case. 
               
              4.    The EEA Joint Committee shall issue an annual report on the functioning and the development of this Agreement .
               
                                                          
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 31 
               
               
                                                    Section 3 
                                            Parliamentary cooperation 
               
               
                                                     Article 95 
              1.    An EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee is hereby established.  It shall be composed of equal numsb oerf, on the 
                    one hand, members of the European Parliament and, on the other, members of Parliaments of the EFTA States. The 
                    total number of members of the Committee is laid down in the Statute in Protocol 36. 
               
              2.    The EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee shall alternately hold sessions in the Community and in an EFTA State in 
                    accordance with the provisions laid down in Protocol 36. 
               
              3.    The EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee shall contribute, through dialogue and debate, to a better understanding 
                    between the Community and the EFTA States in the fields covered by this Agreement. 
               
              4.    The EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee may express its views in the form of reports or resolutions, as appropriate.  
                    It shall, in particular, examine the annual report of the EEA Joint Committee, issued in accordance with 
                    Article 94 (4), on the functioning and the development of this Agreement. 
               
              5.    The President of the EEA Council may appear before the EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee in order to be heard 
                    by it. 
               
              6.    The EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure. 
               
               
                                                    Section 4 
                                Cooperation between economic and social partners 
               
               
                                                     Article 96 
              1.    Members of the Economic and Social Committee and other bodies representing the social partners in the 
                    Community and the corresponding bodies in the EFTA States shall work to strengthen contacts between them and to 
                    cooperate in an organized and regular manner in order to enhance the awareness of the economic and social aspects 
                    of the growing interdependence of the economies of the Contracting Parties and of their interests within the context 
                    of the EEA. 
               
              2.    To this end, an EEA Consultative Committee is hereby established.  It shall be composed of equal numbers of, on 
                    the one hand, members of the Economic and Social Committee of the Community and, on the other, members of the 
                    EFTA Consultative Committee.  The EEA Consultative Committee may express its views in the form of reports or 
                    resolutions, as appropriate. 
               
              3.    The EEA Consultative Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure. 
                                                          
                                                  CHAPTER 2 
                                    THE DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURE 
               
               
                                                     Article 97 
              This Agreement does not prejudge the right for each Contracting Party to amend, without prejudice to the principle of non-
              discrimination and after having informed the other Contracting Parties, its internal legislation in the areas covered by  this
              Agreement: 
               
              -     if the EEA Joint Committee concludes that the legislation as amend dde oes not affect the good functioning of this 
                    Agreement; or 
               
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 32 
               
               
              -     if the procedures referred to in Article 98 have been completed. 
               
               
                                                     Article 98 
              The Annexes to this Agreement and Protocols 1 to 7, 9 to 11, 19 to 27, 30 to 32, 37, 39, 41 and 47, as appropri,a mteay be 
              amended by a decision of the EEA Joint Committee in accordance with Articles 93 (2), 99, 100, 102 and 103 .
               
               
                                                     Article 99 
              1.    As soon as new legislation is being drawn up by the EC Commission in a field which is governed by this 
                    Agreement, the EC Commission shall informally seek advice from experts of the EFTA States in the same way as it 
                    seeks advice from experts of the EC Member States for the elaboration of its proposals. 
               
              2.    When transmitting its proposal to the Council of the European Communi,t tiehes  EC Commission shall transmit 
                    copies thereof to the EFTA States. 
               
                    At the request of one of the Contracting Parties, a preliminary exchange of views takes place in the EEA Joint 
                    Committee. 
               
              3.    During the phase preceding the decision of the Council of the European Communities, in a continuous information 
                    and consultation process, the Contracting Parties consult each other again in the EEA Joint Committee at the 
                    significant moments at the request of one of them. 
               
              4.    The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in good faith during the information and consultation phase with a view to 
                    facilitating, at the end of the process, the decision-taking in the EEA Joint Committee. 
                                                          
                                                          
                                                    Article 100 
              The EC Commission shall ensure experts of the EFTA States as wide a parattiiocinp as possible according to the areas 
              concerned, in the preparatory stage of draft measures to be submitted subsequently to the committees which assist the EC 
              Commission in the exercise of its executive powers.  In this regard, when drawing up drafst urmeesa the EC Commission 
              shall refer to experts of the EFTA States on the same basis as it refers to experts of the EC Member States. 
               
              In the cases where the Council of the European Communities is seized in accordance with the procedure applicable to the 
              type of committee involved, the EC Commission shall transmit to the Council of the European Communities the views of the 
              experts of the EFTA States. 
                                                          
                                                          
                                                    Article 101 
              1.    In respect of committees which are covered neither by Article 81 nor by Article 100 experts from EFTA States shall 
                    be associated with the work when this is called for by the good functioning of this Agreement .
               
                    These committees are listed in Protocol 37.  The modalities of such an association are set out in the relevant sectoral 
                    Protocols and Annexes dealing with the matter concerned. 
               
              2.    If it appears to the Contracting Parties that such an association should be extended to other committees which 
                    present similar characteristics, the EEA Joint Committee may amend Protocol 37. 
               
                                                          
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 33 
               
               
                                                    Article 102 
              1.    In order to guarantee the legal security and the homogeneity of the EEA, the EEA Joint Committee shall take a 
                    decision concerning an amendment of an Annex to this Agreement as closely as possible to the adoption by the 
                    Community of the corresponding new Community legislation with a view to permitting a simultaneous application 
                    of the latter as well as of the amendments of the Annexes to the Agreement.  To this end, the Community shall, 
                    whenever adopting a legislative act on an issue which is governed by this Agreement, as soon as possible inform the 
                    other Contracting Parties in the EEA Joint Committee. 
               
              2.    The part of an Annex to this Agreement which would be directly affected by the new legislation is assessed in the 
                    EEA Joint Committee. 
               
              3.    The Contracting Parties shall make all efforts to arrive at an agreement on matters relevant to this Agreement. 
               
                    The EEA Joint Committee shall, in particular, make every effort to find a mutually acceptable solution where a 
                    serious problem arises in any area which, in the EFTA States, falls within the competence of the legislator. 
               
              4.    If, notwithstanding the application of the preceding paragraph, an agreement on an amendment of an Annex to this 
                    Agreement cannot be reached, the EEA Joint Committee shall examine all further possibilities to maintain the good 
                    functioning of this Agreement and take any decision necessary to this effect, including the possibility to take notice 
                    of the equivalence of legislation.  Such a decision shall be taken at the latest at the expiry of a period of six months 
                    from the date of referral to the EEA Joint Committee or, if that date is later, on the date of entry into force of the 
                    corresponding Community legislation. 
               
              5.    If, at the end of the time limit set out in paragraph 4, the EEA Joint Committee has not taken a decision on an 
                    amendment of an Annex to this Agreement, the affected part thereof, as determined in accordance with paragraph 2, 
                    is regarded as provisionally suspended, subject to a decision to the contrary by the EEA Joint Comtmee.it  Such a 
                    suspension shall take effect six months after the end of the period referred to in paragraph 4, but in no event earlier 
                    than the date on which the corresponding EC act is implemented in the Community.  The EEA Joint Committee 
                    shall pursue its efforts to agree on a mutually acceptable solution in order for the suspension to be terminated as 
                    soon as possible. 
               
              6.    The practical consequences of the suspension referred to in paragraph 5 shall be discussed in the EEA Joint 
                    Committee.  The rights and obligations which individuals and economic operators have already acquired under this 
                    Agreement shall remain.  The Contracting Parties shall, as appropriate, decide on the adjustments necessary due to 
                    the suspension. 
               
                                                          
                                                    Article 103 
              1.    If a decision of theE AE Joint Committee can be binding on a Contracting Party only after the fulfilment of 
                    constitutional requirements, the decision shall, if a date is contained therein, enter into force on that date, provided 
                    that the Contracting Party concerned has notified the other Contracting Parties by that date that the constitutional 
                    requirements have been fulfilled. 
               
                    In the absence of such a notification by that date, the decision shall enter into force on the first day of the second 
                    month following the last notification. 
               
              2.    If upon the expiry of a period of six months after the decision of the EEA Joint Committee such a notification has 
                    not taken place, the decision of the EEA Joint Committee shall be applied provisionally pending the fulfilment of 
                    the constitutional requirements unless a Contracting Party notifies that such a provisional application cannot take 
                    place.  In the latter case, or if a Contracting Party notifies th-re natifoicnation of a decision of the EEA Joint 
                    Committee, the suspension provided for in Article 102 (5) shall take effect one month after such a notification but in 
                    no event earlier than the date on which the corresponding EC act is implemented in the Community .
               
               
                                                    Article 104 
                    Decisions taken by the EEA Joint Committee in the cases provided for in this Agreement shall, unless otherwise 
                    provided for therein, upon their entry into force be binding on the Contracting Parties which shall take the necessary 
                    steps to ensure their implementation and application. 
               
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 34 
               
               
                                                  CHAPTER 3 
                               HOMOGENEITY, SURVEILLANCE PROCEDURE 
                                       AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
               
                                                          
                                                    Section 1 
                                                  Homogeneity 
               
               
                                                    Article 105 
              1.    In order to achieve the objective of the Contracting Parties to arrive at as uniform an interpretation as possible of the 
                    provisions of the Agreement and those provisions of Community legislation which are substantially reproduced in 
                    the Agreement, the EEA Joint Committee shall act in accordance with this Article. 
               
              2.    The EEA Joint Committee shall keep under constant review the development of the case law of the Court of Juscte i
                    of the European Communities and the EFTA Court.  To this end judgments of these Courts shall be transmitted to 
                    the EEA Joint Committee which shall act so as to preserve the homogeneous interpretation of the Agreement. 
               
              3.    If the EEA Joint Committee within two months after a difference in the case law of the two Courts has been brought 
                    before it, has not succeeded to preserve the homogeneous interpretation of the Agreement, the procedures laid down 
                    in Article 111 may be applied. 
               
               
                                                    Article 106 
              In order to ensure as uniform an interpretation as possible of this Agreement, in full deference to the independence of courts, 
              a system of exchange of information concerning judgments by the EFTA Court, the Court of Justice of the European 
              Communities and the Court of First Instance of the European Communities and the Courts of last instance of the EFTA 
              States shall be set up by the EEA Joint Committee.  This system shall comprise: 
               
              (a)   transmission to the Registrar of the Court of Justice of the European Communities of judgments delivered by such 
                    courts on the interpretation and application of, on the one hand, this Agreement or, on the other hand, the Treaty 
                    establishing the European Economic Community and the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel 
                    Community, as amended or supplemented, as well as the acts adopted in pursuance thereof in so far as they concern 
                    provisions which are identical in substance to those of this Agreement; 
               
              (b)   classification of these judgments by the Registrar of the Court of Justice of the European Communities including, as 
                    far as necessary, the drawing up and publication of translations and abstracts; 
               
              (c)   communications by the Registrar of the Court of Justice of the European Communities of the relevant documents to 
                    the competent national authorities, to be designated by each Contracting Party. 
                                                          
               
                                                    Article 107 
              Provisions on the possibility for an EFTA State to allow a court or tribunal to ask the Court of Justice of the European 
              Communities to decide on the interpretation of an EEA rule are laid down in Protocol 34. 
               
                    Updated 1.8.2016                                 EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                     p. 35 
                     
                     
                                                                         Section 2 
                                                                Surveillance procedure 
                     
                     
                                                                          Article 108 
                    1.      The EFTA States shall establish an independent surveillance authority (EFTA Surveillance Authority) as well as 
                            procedures similar to those existing in the Community iingnc prlud ocedures for ensuring the fulfilment of 
                            obligations under this Agreement and for control of the legality of acts of the EFTA Surveillance Authority 
                            regarding competition. 
                     
                    2.      The EFTA States shall establish a court of justice (EFTA Court). 
                     
                    The EFTA Court shall, in accordance with a separate agreement between the EFTA States, with regard to the application of 
                    this Agreement be competent, in particular, for: 
                     
                    (a)      actions concerning the surveillance procedure regarding the EFTA States; 
                    (b)      appeals concerning decisions in the field of competition taken by the EFTA Surveillance Authority; 
                    (c)      the settlement of disputes between two or more EFTA States. 
                     
                     
                                                                          Article 109 
                    1.      The fulfilment of the obligations under this Agreement shall be monitored by, on the one hand, the EFTA 
                            Surveillance Authority and, on the other, the EC Commission acting in conformity with the Treaty establishing the 
                                                           (15). 
                            European Economic Community
                     
                    2.      In order to ensure a uniform surveillance throughout the EEA, the EFTA Surveillance tyA utand thorihe EC 
                            Commission shall cooperate, exchange information and consult each other on surveillance policy issues and 
                            individual cases. 
                     
                    3.      The EC Commission and the EFTA Surveillance Authority shall receive any complaints concerning the application 
                            of this Agreement.  They shall inform each other of complaints received. 
                     
                    4.      Each of these bodies shall examine all complaints falling within its competence and shall pass to the other body any 
                            complaints which fall within the competence of that body. 
                     
                    5.      In case of disagreement between these two bodies with regard to the action to be taken in relation to a complaint or 
                            with regard to the result of the examination, either of the bodies may refer the matter to the EEA Joint Committee 
                            which shall deal with it in accordance with Article 111. 
                     
                                                                                 
                                                                          Article 110 
                    Decisions under this Agreement by the EFTA Surveillance Authority and the EC Commission which impose a pecuniary 
                    obligation on persons other than States, shall be enforceable.  The same shall apply to such judgmntes under this Agreement 
                    by the Court of Justice of the European Communities, the Court of First Instance of the European Communities and the 
                    EFTA Court. 
                     
                    Enforcement shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure in force in the State in the territory of which it is carried out.  
                    The order for its enforcement shall be appended to the decision, without other formality than verification of the authentiy cit
                    of the decision, by the authority which each Contracting Party shall designate for this purpose and shall make known to the 
                    other Contracting Parties, the EFTA Surveillance Authority, the EC Commission, the Court of Justice of the European 
                    Communities, the Court of First Instance of the European Communities and the EFTA Court. 
                                                                               
                    15
                    ( )  Words "and the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community" deleted  by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 
                        29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005. 
                     
              Updated 1.8.2016                   EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                    p. 36 
               
               
               
              When these formalities have been completed on application by the party concerned, the latter may proceed to enforcement, 
              in accordance with the law of the State in the territory of which enforcement is to be carried out, by bringing the matter 
              directly before the competent authority. 
               
              Enforcement may be suspended only by a decision of the Court of Justice of the European Communities, as far as decisions 
              by the EC Commission, the Court of First Instance of the European Communities or the Court of Justice of the European 
              Communities are concerned, or by a decision of the EFTA Court as far as decisions by the EFTA Surveillance Authority or 
              the EFTA Court are concerned.  However, the courts of the States concerned shall have jurisdiction over complaints that 
              enforcement is being carried out in an irregular manner. 
               
               
                                                    Section 3 
                                              Settlement of disputes 
               
               
                                                    Article 111 
              1.    The Community or an EFTA S tamteay bring a matter under dispute which concerns the interpretation or 
                    application of this Agreement before the EEA Joint Committee in accordance with the following provisions .
               
              2.    The EEA Joint Committee may settle the dispute.  It shall be provided with all information which might be of use in 
                    making possible an indepth examination of the situation, with a view to finding an acceptable solution.  To this end, 
                    the EEA Joint Committee shall examine all possibilities to maintain the good functioning of the Agreement. 
               
              3.    If a dispute concerns the interpretation of provisions of this Agreement, which are identical in substance to 
                    corresponding rules of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community and the Treaty establishing the 
                    European Coal and Steel Community and to acts adopted in application of these two Treaties and if the dispute has 
                    not been settled within three months after it has been brought before the EEA Joint Committee, the Contracting 
                    Parties to the dispute may agree to request the Court of Justice of the European Communities to give a ruling on the 
                    interpretation of the relevant rules. 
               
              If the EEA Joint Committee in such a dispute has not reached an agreement on a solution within six months from the date on 
              which this procedure was initiated or if, by then, the Contracting Parties to the dispute have not decided to ask for a ruling by 
              the Court of Justice of the European Communities, a Contracting Party may, in order to remedy possible imbalances ,
               
              -     either take a safeguard measure in accordance with Article 112(2) and following the procedure of Article 113; 
               
              -     or apply Article 102 mutatis mutandis. 
               
              4.    If a dispute concerns the scope or duration of safeguard measures taken in accordance with Article 111(3) or Article 
                    112, or the proportoinality of rebalancing measures taken in accordance with Article 114, and if the EEA Joint 
                    Committee after three months from the date when the matter has been brought before it has not succeeded to resolve 
                    the dispute, any Contracting Party may refer the dispute to arbitration under the procedures laid down in Protocol 
                    33.  No question of interpretation of the provisions of this Agreement referred to in paragraph 3 may be dealt with in 
                    such procedures.  The arbitration award shall be binding on the parties to the dispute. 
               
               
                    Updated 1.8.2016                                    EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                        p. 37 
                     
                     
                                                                          CHAPTER 4 
                                                               SAFEGUARD MEASURES 
                     
                     
                                                                             Article 112 
                    1.       If serious economic, societal or environmental difficulties of a sectorial or regional nature liable to persist are 
                             arising, a Contracting Party may unilaterally take appropriate measures unedr the conditions and procedures laid 
                             down in Article 113. 
                     
                    2.       Such safeguard measures shall be restricted with regard to their scope and duration to what is strictly necessary in 
                             order to remedy the situation.  Priority shall be given to such measures as will least disturb the functioning of this 
                             Agreement. 
                     
                    3.       The safeguard measures shall apply with regard to all Contracting Parties. 
                     
                                                                                    
                                                                             Article 113 
                    1.       A Contracting Party which is considering taking safeguard measures under Article 112 shall, without del anyo,tify 
                             the other Contracting Parties through the EEA Joint Committee and shall provide all relevant information. 
                     
                    2.       The Contracting Parties shall immediately enter into consultations in the EEA Joint Committee with a view to 
                             finding a commonly acceptable solution. 
                     
                    3.       The Contracting Party concerned may not take safeguard measures until one month has elapsed after the date of 
                             notification under paragraph 1, unless the consultation procedure under paragraph2 ha    s been concluded before the 
                             expiration of the  stated time limit.  When exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action exclude prior 
                             examination, the Contracting Party concerned may apply forthwith the protective measures strictly necessary to 
                             remedy the situation. 
                     
                              For the Community, the safeguard measures shall be taken by the EC Commission. 
                     
                    4.       The Contracting Party concerned shall, without delay, notify the measures taken to the EEA Joint Committee and 
                             shall provide all relevant information. 
                     
                    5.       The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of consultations in the EEA Joint Committee every three months 
                             from the date of their adoption with a view to their abolition before the date of expiry envisaged, or to the limitation 
                             of their scope of application. 
                     
                              Each Contracting Party may at any time request the EEA Joint Committee to review such measures. 
                     
                     
                                                                             Article 114 
                    1.       If a safeguard measure taken by a Contracting Party creates an imbalance between the rights and obligations under 
                             this Agreement, any other Contracting Party may towards thatr Cactiongnt Party take such proportionate 
                             rebalancing measures as are strictly necessary to remedy the imbalance.  Priority shall be given to such measures as 
                             will least disturb the functioning of the EEA. 
                     
                    2.       The procedure under Article 113 shall apply. 
                                                             
                     Updated 1.8.2016                                     EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                           p. 38 
                      
                      
                                                                           PART VIII 
                                                          FINANCIAL MECHANISM 
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 115 
                     With a view to promoting a continuous and balanced strengthening of trade and economic relations between the Contracting 
                     Parties, as provided for in Article 1, the Contracting Parties agree on the need to reduce theeco    nomic and social disparities 
                     between their regions.  They note in this regard the relevant provisions set out elsewhere in this Agreement and its related 
                     Protocols, including certain of the arrangements regarding agriculture and fisheries. 
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 116 
                     A Financial Mechanism shall be established by the EFTA States to contribute, in the context of the EEA and in addition to 
                     the efforts already deployed by the Community in this regard, to the objectives laid down in Article 115 .
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 117 
                     (16)  Provisions governing the Financial Mechanisms are set out in Protocol 38, Protocol 38a, the Addendum toP  rotocol 38a, 
                     Protocol 38b, the Addendum to Protocol 38b and Protocol 38c. 
                      
                                                                                       
                                                                             PART IX 
                                               GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS 
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 118 
                     1.       Where a Contracting Party considers that it would be useful in the interests of all the Contracting Parties to develop 
                              the relations established by this Agreement by extending them to fields not covered thereby, it shall submit a 
                              reasoned request to the other Contracting Parteis within the EEA Council.  The latter may instruct the EEA Joint 
                              Committee to examine all the aspects of this request and to issue a report. 
                      
                              The EEA Council may, where appropriate, take the political decisions with a view to opening negotiations betwee n
                              the Contracting Parties. 
                      
                     2.       The agreements resulting from the negotiations referred to in paragraph 1 will be subject to ratification or approval 
                              by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their own procedures. 
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 119 
                                                                                
                      16
                     ( )  Article replaced by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), 
                          provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005, subsequently replaced by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, 
                          p. 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.1), provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011, subsequently replaced by the Agreement 
                          between the European Union, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway on an EEA Financial Mechanismfo r the period 2009-2014 (OJ No L 291, 
                          9.11.2010, p. 4), e.i.f. 1.2.2011, subsequently replaced by the 2014 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 170, 11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA 
                          Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f.pe  nding, subsequently replaced by the Agreement between the 
                          European Union, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway on an EEA Financial Mechanism 2014-2021 (OJ L 141, 28.5.2016, p. 3 )p,rovisionally 
                          applicable as of 1.8.2016, e.i.f. pending. 
                      
                   Updated 1.8.2016                                 EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                     p. 39 
                    
                    
                   The Annexes and the acts referred to therein as adapted for the purposes of this Agreement as well as the Protocols shall 
                   form an integral part of this Agreement. 
                    
                    
                                                                         Article 120 
                    17
                   (  ) Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement and in particular in Protocols 41 and 43, the application of the provisions of 
                   this Agreement shall prevail over provisions in existing bilateral or multilateral agreements binding the European Economic 
                   Community, on the one hand, and one or more EFTA States, on the other, to the extent that the same subject matter is 
                   governed by this Agreement. 
                    
                    
                                                                         Article 121 
                   The provisions of this Agreement shall not preclude cooperation : 
                     
                    (a)     within the framework of the Nordi ccooperation to the extent that such cooperation does not impair the good 
                            functioning of this Agreement; 
                     
                    (b)     within the framework of the regional union between Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the extent that the objectives 
                            of this union are not attained by the application of this Agreement and the good functioning of this Agreement is not 
                            impaired; 
                     
                               (18) 
                    (c)     [  ]
                    
                                                                         Article 122 
                   The representatives, delegates and experts of the Contracting Parties, as well as officials and other servants acting under this 
                   Agreement shall be required, even after their duties have ceased, not to disclose information of the kind covered by the 
                   obligation of professional secrecy, in particular information about undertakings, their business relations or their cost 
                   components. 
                    
                    
                                                                         Article 123 
                   Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent a Contracting Party from taking any measures: 
                    
                   (a)      which it considers necessary to prevent the disclosure of information contrary to its essential security interests; 
                    
                   (b)      which relate to the production of, or trade in, arms, munitions and war materials or other products indispensable for 
                            defence purposes or to research, development or production indispensable for defence purposes, provided that such 
                            measures do not impair the conditions of competition in respect of products not intended for specifically military 
                            purposes; 
                     
                    (c)     which it considers essential to its own security in the event of serious internal disturbances affecting the 
                            maintenance of law and order, in time of war or serious international tension constituting threat of war or in order to 
                            carry out obligations it has accepted for the purpose of maintaining peace and international security. 
                     
                     
                                                                         Article 124 
                   The Contracting Parties shall accord nationals of EC Member States and EFTA St atthese same treatment as their own 
                   nationals as regards participation in the capital of companies or firms within the meaning of Article 34, without prejudiceo  t
                   the application of the other provisions of this Agreement. 
                    
                                                                              
                    17
                   ( )  The words “Protocols 41, 43 and 44” replaced by the words “Protocols 41 and 43”. 
                    18
                   ( )  Paragraph (c) deleted by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), 
                        provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005. 
                     Updated 1.8.2016                                     EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                           p. 40 
                      
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 125 
                     This Agreement shall in no way prejudice the rules of the Contracting Parties governing the system of property ownership. 
                                                                                       
                      
                                                                                Article 126 
                        19
                     1.( )    The Agreement shall apply to the territories to which the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community 
                               20                                                                      21                                       22
                              (  )  is applied and under the conditions laid down in that Tr(ea)t,y a  nd to the territories of Iceland( ) , the 
                                                                                            23
                                                                                           ( ). 
                              Principality of Liechtenstein and the Kingdom of Norway 
                      
                     2.       Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Agreement shall not apply to the Åland Islands.  The Government ofan Fd inl
                              may, however, give notice, by a declaration deposited when ratifying this Agreement with the Depositary, which 
                              shall transmit a certified copy thereof to the Contracting Parties, that the Agreement shall apply to those Islands 
                              under the same conditions as it applies to other parts of Finland subject to the following provisions: 
                      
                              (a)      The provisions of this Agreement shall not preclude the application of the provisions in force at any given 
                                       time on the Åland Islands on: 
                      
                                       (i)      restrictions on the right for natural persons who do not enjoy regional citizenship in Åland, and for 
                                                legal persons, to acquire and hold real property on the Åland Islands without permission by the 
                                                competent authorities of the Islands; 
                                        (ii)    restrictions on the right of establishment and the right to provide services by natural persons who 
                                                do not enjoy regional citizenship in Åland, or by any legal person, without permission by the 
                                                competent authorities of the Åland Islands. 
                      
                              (b)      The rights enjoyed by Ålanders in Finland shall not be affected by this Agreement. 
                               
                              (c)      The authorities of the Åland Islands shall apply the same treatment to all natural and legal persons of the 
                                       Contracting Parties. 
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 127 
                     Each Contracting Party may withdraw from this Agreement provided it gives at least twelve months' notice in writing to the 
                     other Contracting Parties. 
                      
                     Immediately after the notification of the intended withdrawal, the other Contracting Parties shall convene a diplomatic 
                     conference in order to envisage the necessary modifications to bring to the Agreement. 
                      
                      
                                                                                Article 128 
                        24
                     1.( )    Any European State becoming a member of the Community shall, and the Swiss Confederation or any European 
                              State becoming a member of EFTA may, apply to become a party to this Agreement.  It shall address its application 
                              to the EEA Council. 
                                                                                
                      19
                     ( )  The words “the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of Sweden and the Swiss Confederation” shall be replaced by the words “the Kingdom of Norway and 
                          the Kingdom of Sweden”. 
                      20
                     ( )  Words “ and the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community” deleted by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 
                          29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005. 
                      21
                     ( )  Words “those Treaties” replaced by the words “that Treaty” by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA 
                          Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005. 
                      22
                     ( )  Words "Republic of" deleted by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.  1),
                          provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011. 
                      23
                     ( )  Words "the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland, the Republic of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway and the 
                          Kingdom of Sweden" replaced by the words "the Republic of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein and the Kingdom of Norway" by the 2004 EEA 
                          Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 
                          6.12.2005.  
                      24
                     ( )  Subparagraph introduced by the Adjusting Protocol replaces former text.  
                      Updated 1.8.2016                                     EEA AGREEMENT, Main Part                                            p. 41 
                       
                       
                       
                      2.       The terms and conditions for such participation shall be the subject of an agreement between the Contracting Parties 
                               and the applicant State.  That agreement shall be submitted for ratification or approval by all Contracting Parties in 
                               accordance with their own procedures. 
                                                                                         
                       
                                                                                 Article 129 
                      1.       This Agreement is drawn up in a single original in the Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, 
                               Icelandic, Italian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanishn ad Swedish languages, each of these texts being equally 
                               authentic. 
                       
                               25
                              (  )  "Pursuant to the enlargements of the European Economic Area the versions of this Agreement in the Bulgarian, 
                                      Croatian, Czech, Estonian, Hungarian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Romanian, Slovak and 
                                      Slovenian languages shall be equally authentic."; 
                       
                       
                                26
                               ( )  
                              "The texts of the acts referred to in the Annexes are equally authentic in the Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, 
                              Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, 
                              Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish languages as published in the Official Journal of the 
                              European Union and shall for the authentication thereof be drawn up in the Icelandic and Norwegian languages and 
                              published in the EEA Supplement to the Official Journal of the European Union.". 
                       
                       
                      2.       This Agreement shall be ratified or approved by the Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective 
                               constitutional requirements. 
                       
                               It shall be deposited with the General Secretariat of the Council of the European Communities by which certified 
                               copies shall be transmitted to all other Contracting Parties. 
                       
                               The instruments of ratification or approval shall be deposited with the General Secretariat of the Council of the 
                               European Communities which shall notify all other Contracting Parties. 
                       
                        27
                        ( )    This Agreement shall enter into force on the date and under the conditions provided for in the Protocol Adjusting 
                      3.
                               the Agreement on the European Economic Area. 
                       
                       
                      IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol. 
                       
                      DONE at Brussels, this seventeenth day of March in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-three. 
                                                                                 
                      25
                      ( )  Subparagraph inserted by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), 
                           provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005, subsequently replaced by the 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; 
                           EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.1), provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f. 9.11.2011, subsequently replaced by the 2014 EEA Enlargement 
                           Agreement (OJ No L 170, 11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f. pending. 
                      26
                      ( )  Subparagraph replaced by the 2004 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 130, 29.4.2004, p. 3 and EEA Supplement No 23, 29.4.2004, p. 1), 
                           provisionally applicable as of 1.5.2004, e.i.f. 6.12.2005,s ubsequently replaced by 2007 EEA Enlargement Agreement (OJ No L 221, 25.8.2007, p. 15; 
                           EEA Supplement No 39, 26.6.2008, p.1), provisionally applicable as of 1.8.2007, e.i.f .9.11.2011, subsequently replaced by the 2014 EEA Enlargement 
                           Agreement (OJ No L 170, 11.6.2014, p. 5 and EEA Supplement No 58, 9.10.2014, p. 1), provisionally applicable as of 12.4.2014, e.i.f. pending. 
                      27
                      ( )  Subparagraph introduced by the Adjusting Protocol replaces former text. 
