        
        
        
   Payment System Improvement - 
        Public Consultation Paper 
     The Federal Reserve Banks      September 10, 2013 
          The U.S. payment system is undergoing a remarkable period of change, driven by 
          rapid adoption of technology and evolving end-user expectations. Going forward, 
          opportunity exists to improve speed and efficiency of payments and to maintain 
          payment system safety in the face of escalating threats. The Federal Reserve 
          Banks believe that collaboration and engagement with the industry is the 
          foundation of any enduring strategic improvements to the U.S. payment system 
          and look forward to public input to this consultative paper. 
        
        
                  Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                                            1 
                   
                  Introduction 
                  Payments in the United States and around the world are undergoing a remarkable period of change that 
                  may have been unimaginable twenty years ago. Payment preferences are evolving rapidly due to 
                  demographic shifts and application of new technology, among other factors. The payment system is 
                  becoming more complex, comprised of incumbents, such as banks and processors; new entrants, such 
                  as nonbank innovators; and end users - individuals, corporations, and governments - that have 
                  increasingly benefited from innovations focused on their payment needs. In such an environment, 
                  ongoing innovation is necessary to ensure safe, efficient, and accessible payments that support 
                  economic activity and help maintain the global competitiveness of the United States. 
                  Industry adoption of new payment services and technology in this country has been driven mostly by 
                  market forces rather than government direction. Yet history shows that it is sometimes beneficial for a 
                  central coordinating body to take steps to facilitate cooperation to address network or coordination 
                  challenges that otherwise impede innovation, efficiency, and other public benefits. The Federal Reserve 
                  Banks believe that ubiquitous, open payment networks and/or broadly interoperable networks best 
                  serve the public interest because the more members of society who can be reached with a payment 
                  instrument, the more valuable the payment instrument is to each of the other members of society. The 
                  breadth and complexity of the U.S. landscape make it especially hard to coordinate payment innovations 
                  and achieve ubiquity.1
                                            The Federal Reserve Banks see one of their roles as bringing the industry together 
                  to foster coordination and, where appropriate, to drive payment system improvement. 
                  The purpose of this public consultation paper is:  
                       1.  To articulate the Federal Reserve Banks’ perspective on: 
                                •   Key gaps and opportunities in the current payment environment; and 
                                •   Desired outcomes that close these gaps and capture these opportunities. 
                       2.  To solicit broad industry input on: 
                                •   The Federal Reserve Banks’ perspectives on gaps, opportunities, and desired outcomes 
                                    articulated in this paper; 
                                •   Potential strategies and tactics to shape the future of the U.S. payment system; and 
                                •   The Federal Reserve Bank’s role in implementing these strategies and tactics. 
                                     
                           Questions near the end of this document are provided for those who would like to respond. 
                   
                                                       
                                                                             
                  1
                    For example, in the United States there are about 14,000 depository institutions, hundreds of payment service 
                  providers, and dozens of proprietary payment networks. 
                   
                   
            Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                 2 
            Federal Reserve Bank Strategic Direction in Payments 
            The Federal Reserve Banks updated their strategic direction in payments in 2012.2
                                                                      At the heart is a 
            vision to improve the speed and efficiency of the U.S. payment system from end-to-end over the next 
            decade while maintaining a high level of safety and accessibility. End-to-end means from the point of 
            payment origination to the point of receipt, including payment notification and reconciliation. This 
            vision was crafted based on both Federal Reserve Bank internal analysis of payment evolution and 
            external consultation with stakeholders. 
            Also, the Federal Reserve Banks’ vision encompasses the broader payments industry, meaning all 
            organizations involved in delivering payment services to end users, including depository institutions and 
            their trade associations, nonbank service providers, payment processing companies, and payment 
            consultants. An inclusive vision is important because industry collaboration and engagement is essential 
            to any enduring strategic improvements to the U.S. payment system. Moreover, the most promising 
            ideas for payment innovations and strategic change often result from ongoing dialogue among diverse 
            industry participants.  
            The current vision focuses on the end-to-end payment process, whereas past Federal Reserve Bank 
            payment strategies focused on interbank issues. This expanded vision seeks to ensure that payment 
            system improvements meet the needs of end users who are the ultimate beneficiaries of the payment 
            system; thus, their needs should drive improvements. End users have access to powerful 
            communications technologies, and this is changing not only how they want to make payments, but also 
            how they manage their finances. The next-generation payment system must accommodate these 
            evolving end-user payment preferences.  
            In many ways, today’s payment system does accommodate the changing payment preferences of end 
            users. New electronic networks are proliferating, including networks for person-to-person transfers, 
            online merchants, business trade payments, and others. However, many of these networks do not have 
            a broad base of members, which makes it inconvenient or impossible for in-network end users to make 
            or receive payments to or from out-of-network end users. By contrast, legacy payment systems are 
            nearly ubiquitous and allow end users to send payments to almost any receiver, without requiring the 
            receiver to enroll in the system to retrieve the payment.3
                                                    The Federal Reserve Banks are interested in 
            fostering an environment where innovative payment services can be developed to meet the changing 
            payment preferences of end users without sacrificing the efficiency advantages of near-ubiquity.4
                                                                                 
                                                                       
            2
             Speech given by Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland: 
            http://www.clevelandfed.org/For_the_Public/News_and_Media/Speeches/2012/Pianalto_20121022.cfm 
            3
             Many legacy payment types require a transaction account, which may be cumbersome to establish. However, 
            once a transaction account is established, the end user has access to a wide array of legacy payment services. 
            4
             Over 90% of consumers have a transaction account, giving them access to bank-account based payments such as 
            checks, funds transfers, ACH payments, and debit cards (Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2013, Federal 
            Reserve Board). Payment cards are also broadly available; over 90% of consumers use some type of payment card 
            in a given year (2009 Survey of Consumer Payment Choice, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston), and an increasing 
            percentage of merchants accept payment cards. 
             
            Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                 3 
            Gaps / Opportunities in Today’s Payment System 
            The Federal Reserve Banks conducted a gap and opportunity analysis of the payment environment to 
            understand key areas where the payment system could be improved relative to the vision of safe and 
            accessible but faster and more efficient payments on an end-to-end basis. Results of this analysis, 
            shaped by industry discussion, are not surprising as they are comparable to the results of a similar gap 
            analysis conducted in 2002.5
                                The following are the key gaps and opportunities identified:  
              1.  Check writing persists because checks have important attributes, including ubiquity and 
                 convenience, which are not well replicated by electronic alternatives for some transactions. 
                 Many receivers of checks prefer other forms of payment but exercise little control over the 
                 sender to request a preferred form of payment. 
              2.  In a world where several other countries are moving to ubiquitous near-real-time retail payment 
                 systems, the U.S. payment system does not have this capability.6
                                                               The U.S. payment system has 
                 begun to migrate incrementally toward faster payments primarily through private-sector 
                 innovation; but these innovations, when considered in total, have not resulted in a ubiquitous 
                 near-real-time system.  
              3.  Most recent payment innovations have yet to gain significant market penetration and are still 
                 limited-participation systems where both sender and receiver must join. Legacy payment 
                 systems tend to be more ubiquitous, making them efficient and accessible for those who already 
                 maintain a transaction account with their bank (payers and payees of any transaction). 
              4.  Some features that are desired increasingly by end users are generally lacking in many legacy 
                 payment systems, such as –  
                    o  A real-time validation process assuring the payee that the payer’s account exists and it 
                       has enough funds or available credit to cover the payment; 
                    o  Assurance that a payment will not be returned or reversed; 
                    o  Timely notification to the payer and payee that the payment has been made;  
                    o  Near-real-time posting / availability of funds to both the payer’s and payee’s accounts; 
                       and 
                    o  Masked account details, eliminating the need for end users to disclose bank account 
                       information to each other. 
                 Payment cards and wire transfers possess some, but not all of these features; check and ACH 
                 payments generally lack these features.7
                                              
              5.  In general, cross-border payments from and to the United States are slow, inconvenient, costly, 
                 and lack transparency regarding fees and timing.  
                                                                       
            5
             See Staff Study 175, The Future of Retail Payment Systems: Industry Interviews and Analysis, Board of Governors 
            of the Federal Reserve System, December 2002. 
            6
             Throughout this document, references to near-real-time payments are intended to mean retail and/or general 
            purpose payments. Retail or general purpose payments include business trade payments, personal transfers, 
            consumer bill payments, tax payments, salary payments, point-of-sale payments, online payments, and the like. 
            Retail payments do not include large payments sent on high value payment systems to settle transactions between 
            financial institutions or other systemically important activity. 
            7
             Some of these concepts are adapted from The Need for Real-Time Payments in the US, RPGC Group, June 2013. 
             
            Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                 4 
              6.  Mobile devices have potential to transform wide ranging aspects of business and commerce, 
                 including the payment. Digital wallet applications on mobile devices provide merchants with 
                 valuable information that can be leveraged for commercial purposes such as consumer-specific 
                 location information, transaction history, and other context-specific data.8
                                                                      With some digital 
                 wallet applications, the payment instrument is selected during the initial set-up phase and the 
                 payment takes place in the background thereafter, reducing the visibility and choice of payment 
                 instrument at the point of sale. Payment service providers are seeking to define their service 
                 offerings in this new world. 
              7.  Businesses (especially large ones) have payment and accounting systems that are complex and 
                 costly to change, making it difficult to achieve automated, straight-through processing of 
                 invoices, payments, and remittance information.  
              8.  Consumer fears about payment security sometimes inhibit adoption of electronic payments.9
                                                                                   
            The gaps and opportunities outlined above can be summarized in an over-arching problem statement 
            for the U.S. payment system:  
                 End users of payment services are increasingly demanding real-time transactional and 
                 informational features with global commerce capabilities. Legacy payment systems provide a 
                 solid foundation for payment services; however, some of these systems (e.g., check and ACH) rely 
                 on paper-based and/or batch processes, which are not universally fast or efficient from an end-
                 user perspective by today’s standards.10 The challenge for the industry is to provide a payment 
                 system for the future that combines the valued attributes of legacy payment methods – 
                 convenience, safety, and universal reach at low cost to the end user – with new technology that 
                 enables faster processing, enhanced convenience, and the extraction and use of valuable 
                 information that accompanies payments.  
                   
                   
                                   
                                                                       
            8
             For a discussion of the mobile payments opportunity, see, for example, Michael Katz, Increasing Connectedness 
            and Consumer Payments: An Overview, available at http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/pscp/2012/Session-
            1.pdf. 
            9
             The Federal Reserve Banks have additional analysis on payment system safety underway. As other key safety 
            gaps are identified, the Federal Reserve Banks will work with the industry to determine which industry bodies are 
            best suited to address them. 
            10 For example, most check and ACH payments do not settle on the day they are submitted for processing. These 
            settlements generally occur the next day, although some ACH originators choose to value-date the transactions for 
            settlement two days after processing. 
             
               Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                     5 
               Desired Outcomes 
               The Federal Reserve Banks have identified five desired outcomes to be achieved within ten years to 
               address the gaps and opportunities identified above. The outcomes reflect the Federal Reserve Banks’ 
               internal analysis and input from a variety of industry stakeholders. 
                      Desired outcome 1: Key improvements for the future state of the payment system have been 
                      collectively identified and embraced by payment participants, and material progress has been 
                      made in implementing them.  
               This outcome is critical to achieving the desired future state and is fundamental to the remaining 
               desired outcomes. A collective and collaborative approach to improve the payment system will 
               significantly increase the probability of successful improvements. The Federal Reserve Banks desire to 
               be a catalyst for collaboration and have hosted meetings and forums with the industry to gather input 
               on the strategic vision. Similar meetings will continue as the Federal Reserve Banks work closely with the 
               industry on specific tactics to achieve the vision. Also, Federal Reserve Banks will continue to support 
               industry-focused work groups such as the Remittance Coalition and the Mobile Payments Industry Work 
               Group. These and other industry groups provide valuable forums for discussing payment system gaps 
               and possible solutions for addressing them. 
                      Desired outcome 2: A ubiquitous electronic solution(s) for making retail payments exists that 
                      does not require the sender to know the bank account number of the recipient. Confirmation of 
                      good funds will be made at the initiation of the payment.11 The sender and receiver will receive 
                      timely notification that the payment has been made. Funds will be debited from the payer and 
                      made available in near real time to the payee. 
               Today, U.S. consumers can’t make a near-real-time payment in a convenient and cost effective way from 
               any bank account to any other bank account. Multiple limited-participation systems have emerged in 
               recent years designed to meet this need, yet it remains inconvenient for a sender in such a system to 
               send money in near real time, with confirmation of good funds and timely notification, to a receiver 
               outside the system.  
               The Federal Reserve Banks believe that a near-real-time payment capability may ultimately be a 
               beneficial improvement to the payment system that supports economic activity in the United States. 
               This belief is based in part on the emergence of near-real-time payment systems in several other 
               countries, and the expectation that demand for transactional immediacy in the United States will 
               continue to grow. Benefits of near-real-time payments include the ability to make last-minute payments 
               of all types; enhanced cash management for consumers, businesses, and governments due to quicker 
               confirmation of good funds; reduction in fraud for both banks and end users; and a quicker alternative 
               to paper checks for personal transfers. Moreover, a near-real-time payment platform may spur other 
               innovations, particularly in mobile payments, and may enhance U.S. global economic competitiveness. 
                                                                          
               11 ‘Good funds’ means that the payer’s account is valid, funds or available credit are sufficient to cover the 
               payment, and therefore, the payment will not be reversed for lack of funds. 
                
               Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                          6 
               A ubiquitous system for near-real-time payments would require changes to industry infrastructure, 
               either by enhancing an existing payment system or establishing a new one. Funding for the investments 
               required may be hard to obtain, given competing priorities such as complying with new mandates. 
               Payment industry participants that are planning to modernize their core back-end systems may be able 
               to incorporate near-real-time features more cost effectively. Regardless, the actual cost to implement 
               near-real-time payments cannot be known until specific solutions are identified. Once known, the 
               benefits of near-real-time payments must be weighed against the costs of implementation before 
               acting. While initial investment may be significant, benefits will likely accrue over many years.  
                       Desired outcome 3: Over the long run, greater electronification and process improvements have 
                       reduced the average end-to-end (societal) costs of payment transactions and resulted in 
                       innovative payment services that deliver improved value to consumers, businesses, and 
                       governments.  
               Since the mid-1990s, the use of paper checks has declined steadily. Based on data from the 2009 Federal 
               Reserve Payments Study, almost 80 percent of noncash general-purpose payments were made 
               electronically. Yet billions of checks are still written today, for all types of payments. The largest share of 
               checks is consumer bill payments, followed closely by business trade payments and business payments 
               to consumers. Fewer checks are written for personal and point-of-sale payments, yet the annual total of 
               these categories is still in the billions. Although check writing is expected to continue to decline, the 
               Reserve Banks believe that more aggressive actions may be needed to accelerate the transition to 
               ubiquitous electronic payment alternatives.  
               Although greater electronification of retail payments is a desired outcome, paper currency and coins 
               continue to be valued by consumers as a fast and efficient medium of exchange. Cash is also an 
               important contingency payment method following natural disasters and other contingency events and 
               an accessible payment method for anybody, whether or not they maintain a bank account. Unlike paper 
               checks, use of currency has held steady in recent years and is expected to remain an important 
               component of the U.S. payment system, even as innovations emerge that provide convenient 
               substitutes.  
                       Desired outcome 4: Consumers and businesses have better choice in making convenient, cost-
                       effective, and timely cross-border payments from and to the United States. 
               End-user demand for cross-border payments has increased due to globalization of trade and labor. 
               Today, both personal and business cross-border payments typically involve much higher transaction fees 
               and longer processing times than domestic payments. As globalization accelerates, the need for fast and 
               efficient cross-border payment solutions will continue to increase. 
                       Desired outcome 5: The Federal Reserve Banks have collaborated, as appropriate, with the 
                       industry to promote the security of the payment system from end-to-end amid a rapidly 
                       evolving technology and threat environment. In addition, public confidence in the security of 
                       Federal Reserve financial services has remained high.  
                
               Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                          7 
               New ways of making payments and advanced fraud schemes and technologies present new risks and 
               challenges to maintaining public confidence in the payments system. Maintaining the confidentiality of 
               payment information from end-to-end, such as by preventing data breaches, is made more difficult as 
               complexity and interconnectedness of networks have increased. The impact of a significant fraud event, 
               cyber-attack, or natural disaster on the public’s confidence may adversely impact the flow of commerce 
               that is increasingly electronic or “digital.” 
                                              
                
               Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                          8 
               Questions for the Public 
               The Federal Reserve Banks are seeking input from payment system providers and end users on how to 
               improve the payment system. The questions below are designed to elicit reactions to the Federal 
               Reserve Banks’ views on payment system gaps, opportunities and desired outcomes. Public input is also 
               sought on the potential role for the Federal Reserve Banks in payment system improvement, and tactics 
               to guide future direction. Respondents are encouraged to answer as many or as few questions as 
               desired, based on their interest and expertise, and to supplement their responses with any other 
               general perspectives on payment system improvements. To respond to these questions or to see the 
               written responses of others, please visit FedPaymentsImprovement.org
                                                                                  . Responses may be submitted 
               until December 13, 2013. 
               General  
               Q1. Are you in general agreement with the payment system gaps and opportunities identified above? 
               Please explain, if desired. 
                  i.   What other gaps or opportunities not mentioned in the paper could be addressed to make 
                       improvements to the U.S. payment system? 
               Q2. Are you in general agreement with the desired outcomes for payment system improvements over 
               the next 10 years? Please explain, if desired. 
                  i.   What other outcomes should be pursued? 
               Q3. In what ways should the Federal Reserve Banks help improve the payment system as an operator, 
               leader, and/or catalyst?  
                Ubiquitous near-real-time payments 
               Q4. In discussions with industry participants, some have stated that implementing a system for near-
               real-time payments with the features described in the second desired outcome (ubiquitous 
               participation; sender doesn’t need to know the bank account number of the recipient; confirmation of 
               good funds is made at the initiation of the payment; sender and receiver receive timely notification that 
               the payment has been made; funds debited from the payer and made available in near real time to the 
               payee) will require coordinated action by a public authority or industry group. Others have stated that 
               current payment services are evolving toward this outcome and no special action by a public authority 
               or industry group is required. 
                  i.   Which of these perspectives is more accurate, and why? 
                  ii.  What other perspective(s) should be considered? 
                                              
                
                     Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                                                              9 
                     Q5. The second desired outcome articulates features that are desirable for a near-real-time payments 
                     system. They include: 
                          a.  Ubiquitous participation 
                          b.  Sender doesn’t need to know the bank account number of the recipient 
                          c.   Confirmation of good funds is made at the initiation of the payment 
                          d.  Sender and receiver receive timely notification that the payment has been made 
                          e.  Funds debited from the payer and made available in near-real time to the payee 
                                
                         i.    Do you agree that these are important features of a U.S. near-real-time system? Please explain, 
                               if desired. 
                        ii.    What other characteristics or features are important for a U.S. near-real-time system? 
                     Q6. Near-real-time payments with the features described in the second desired outcome could be 
                     provided several different ways, including but not limited to:  
                          a.  Creating a separate wire transfer-like system for near-real-time payments that leverages the 
                               relevant processes, features, and infrastructure already established for existing wire transfer 
                               systems. This option may require a new front-end mechanism or new rules that would provide 
                               near-real-time confirmation of good funds and timely notification of payments to end users and 
                               their financial institutions. 
                          b.  Linking together existing limited-participation networks so that a sender in one network could 
                               make a payment to a receiver in another network seamlessly. This option may require common 
                               standards and rules and a centralized directory for routing payments across networks. 
                          c.   Modifying the ACH to speed up settlement. This option may require a new front-end mechanism 
                               or new network rules that would provide near-real-time confirmation of good funds and timely 
                               notification of payments to end users and their financial institutions. Payments would be settled 
                               periodically during the day. 
                          d.  Enhancing the debit card networks to enable ubiquitous near-real-time payments. 
                          e.  Implementing an entirely new payment system with the features described in the second 
                               desired outcome above.  
                                
                         i.    What would be the most effective way for the U.S. payment system to deliver ubiquitous near-
                               real-time payments, including options that are not listed above? 
                        ii.    What are the likely pros and cons or costs and benefits of each option? What rule or regulation 
                               changes are needed to implement faster payments within existing payment processing 
                               channels? 
                       iii.    Is it sufficient for a solution to be limited to near-real-time authorization and confirmation that 
                               good funds are on their way, or must end-user funds availability and/or interbank settlement 
                               take place in near-real time as well? 
                       iv.     Which payment scenarios are most and least suitable for near real-time payments? (B2B, P2P, 
                               P2B, POS, etc.) 
                                                               
                      
                           Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                                                                                                     10 
                           Q7. Some industry participants have said that efforts to make check payments easier to use, such as by 
                           enabling fully electronic payment orders and/or by speeding up electronic check return information, will 
                           incrementally benefit the payment system. Others argue the resources needed to implement these 
                           efforts will delay a shift to near-real-time payments, which will ultimately be more beneficial to the 
                           payment system. Which of these perspectives do you agree with, and why?  
                           Q8. How will near-real-time payments affect fraud issues that exist with today’s payment systems, if at 
                           all? 
                                i.       Will near-real-time payments create new fraud risks? If yes, please elaborate on those risks. 
                           Q9. To what extent would a ubiquitous near-real-time system bring about pivotal change to mobile 
                           payments? 
                           Q10. What would be the implication if the industry and/or the Federal Reserve Banks do not take any 
                           action to implement faster payments?  
                                i.       What is the cost, including the opportunity cost, of not implementing faster payments in the 
                                         United States?  
                           Q11. To what extent will the industry need to modernize core processing and other backend systems to 
                           support near-real-time payments? 
                                i.       What is the likely timeframe for any such modernization? 
                           Q12. Some industry participants suggest that a new, centralized directory containing account numbers 
                           and routing information for businesses and/or consumers, to which every bank and other service 
                           providers are linked, will enable more electronic payments. A sender using this directory would not need 
                           to know the account or routing information of the receiver.  
                                  i.            What are the merits and drawbacks of this suggestion?  
                                  ii.           What is the feasibility of this suggestion? 
                           Electronification 
                           Q13. Some industry participants say that check use is an enduring part of the U.S. payment system and 
                           that moving away from checks more aggressively would be too disruptive for certain end users. 
                                i.       Is accelerated migration from checks to electronic payment methods a high-priority desired 
                                         outcome for the U.S. payment system? (Accelerated means faster than the current trend of 
                                         gradual migration.) 
                               ii.       Please explain, if desired. 
                              iii.       If yes, should the Federal Reserve Banks establish a target for the percent of noncash payments 
                                         to be initiated via electronic means, by a specific date? For example: “By the year 2018, 95% of 
                                         all noncash payments will be made via electronic means.” 
                              iv.        What is the appropriate target level and date?  
                            
                          Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                                                                                               11 
                          Q14. Business-to-business payments have remained largely paper-based due to difficulties with handling 
                          remittance information. Consumer bill payments also are heavily paper-based due to the lack of comfort 
                          some consumers have with electronic alternatives. In addition, many small businesses have not adopted 
                          ACH for recurring payments due to technical challenges and/or cost constraints. The payment industry 
                          has multiple efforts underway to address these issues.  
                               i.      To what extent are these efforts resulting in migration from checks to other payment types?  
                              ii.      What other barriers need to be addressed to accelerate migration of these payments? 
                             iii.      What other tactics, including incentives, will effectively persuade businesses and consumers to 
                                       migrate to electronic payments? 
                             iv.       Which industry bodies should be responsible for developing and/or implementing these tactics?  
                          Cross-border payments 
                          Q15. To what extent would the broader adoption of the XML-based ISO 20022 payment message 
                          standards in the United States facilitate electronification of business payments and/or cross-border 
                          payments?12 
                          Q16. What strategies and tactics do you think will help move the industry toward desired outcome four - 
                          consumers and businesses have greater choice in making convenient, cost-effective, and timely cross-
                          border payments?  
                          Safety 
                          Q17. Payment security encompasses a broad range of issues including authentication of the parties 
                          involved in the transaction, the security of payment databases, the security of software and devices 
                          used by end users to access payment systems, and security of the infrastructure carrying payment 
                          messages.  
                               i.      Among the issues listed above, or others, what are the key threats to payment system security 
                                       today and in the future? 
                              ii.      Which of these threats are not adequately being addressed? 
                             iii.      What operational or technology changes could be implemented to further mitigate cyber 
                                       threats?  
                          Q18. What type of information on threat awareness and incident response activities would be useful for 
                          the industry?  
                               i.      How should this information be made available? 
                          Q19. What future payment standards would materially improve payment security? 
                               i.      What are the obstacles to the adoption of security-related payment standards? 
                                                                                     
                          12 For information on ISO 20022, see, for example, http://www.iso20022.org/faq.page. 
                           
               Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper                                         12 
               Q20. What collaborative actions should the Federal Reserve Banks take with the industry to promote the 
               security of the payment system from end to end? 
               Q21. Please share any additional perspectives on U.S. payment system improvements. 
                
               Conclusion 
               The U.S. payment system is undergoing a remarkable period of change, driven by rapid adoption of 
               technology and evolving end-user expectations. Going forward, opportunity exists to improve speed and 
               efficiency of payments and to maintain payment system safety in the face of escalating threats. The 
               Federal Reserve Banks believe that collaboration and engagement with the industry is the foundation of 
               any enduring strategic improvements to the U.S. payment system. 
               We look forward to public input to this consultative paper as we jointly explore the most promising 
               ideas for payment system improvements. 
                
