                         postscriptum: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Literary Studies, Vol: 1 (January 2016) 
                                    Online; Peer-Reviewed; Open Access www.postscriptum.co.in 
                                                Dutta, Amar. “The Guide: … ” pp. 22-34 
           
          The Guide: Adaptation from Novel to Film 
           
          Amar Dutta 
          Guest Lecturer in English, Sarat Centenary College 
           
          Amar Dutta is presently working as a Guest Lecturer in English at Sarat Centenary College, Dhaniakhali, 
          Hooghly, where he studied undergraduate Honours course in English from 2009 to 2012. He completed his 
          M.A. in English from The University of Burdwan in 2014 and B.Ed. from the same university in 2015. His areas 
          of interest are film studies and modern literary theory. 
           
          Abstract 
          Adaptation in the film industry is nothing new. Alm otshtree-fourths of all films ever made have been 
          adapted from novels, plays or short stories of the classic literature in every language. Our Indian film 
          industry is of no exception. It is often said that the printed text is, in some way, superior to and more 
          moral than the filmed version. The objective of this paper is to focus on such adaptation–  the adaptation 
          of R.K.Narayan’s Sahitya Akademi Award winning novel The Guide to Vijay Anand’s film Guide. After the 
          release of the film Narayan was very unhapp ybecause he felt that it could not capture the spirit of the 
          story, and he did not like the unwarranted cuts and changes. This is true from the aesthetic view point, 
          but it is equally true that a film director is not bound to the original and he or sh eev herasy right to 
          eliminate or add some characters and incidents which are or are not there in the original text in order to 
          cater the taste of all sorts of public. In the process of adaptation every film director recreates or gives new 
          dimension to the original. The humble attempt in this paper is to trace the changes made by Vijay Anand 
          and to show how these changes made the film a grand success and received several awards and 
          recognition in spite of Narayan’s strong dislike. 
           
          Keywords 
          adaptation, film industry, infidelity, guide, sadhu 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
                                                                                       postscriptum      23 
                 
                       John Harrington in his book Film And /As Literature(1977) estimates that one third of 
                all films ever made has been adapted from novels and if  we include other literary genres, 
                such as drama or short story, that estimate will be sixty-five percent or more. Nearly all of the 
                works of classic literature in every language have been adapted for films –s ome, many times 
                and in multiple languages, settings and formats. For example, Sherlock Holmes(1887)      , the 
                world famous detective fiction by Arthur Conan Doyle, has more than two hundred film 
                versions – from a silent movie made in 1916 by William Gillette to Steven Moffat and Mark 
                Gattis’s startling 2010 reinvention of Sherlock starring Benedict Cumberbatch. There are 
                nearly fifty film versions of William Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juli e(t1594) – from a 1900 
                French version called Romeo et Juliettet o the 2011 animated American film Gnomeo and 
                Juliet. 
                 
                       Our Indian film industry is not an exception of this. From the beginning till date it has 
                been showing endless super-duper hit films adapted from famous novels or pl oar sys hort 
                stories of different regional writers, of Indian English writers and of some foreign writers. 
                Devdas(1917), a Bengali novel by Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay has been made into film not 
                only in many languages including Bengali, Hindi, Telugu, TamUirld, u, Assamese and 
                Malayalam, but also at several times in the same language: in Bengali it has been picturized 
                five times – in 1935 by P.C.Barua, in 1979 by Dilip Roy, in 1982 by Chashi Nazrul Islam, in 
                2002 by Shakti Samanta and in 2013 as a Bangladeshi film again by Chashi Nazrul Islam; in 
                Hindi for four times – in 1936 by P.C.Baura, in 1955 by Bimal Roy, in 2002 by Sanjay Leela 
                Bhansali and in 2009 as Dev. D by Anurag Kashyap; in Telugu for two times –i n 1953 by 
                Vedantam Raghavaiah, and in 1974 as Deadasv u by Vijay Nirmala; in Urdu  in 1965 by 
                Khawaja Sarfaraj; in Assamese in 1937 once again by P.C.Barua; and in Malayalam as 
                Devadas by Cross Belt Mani in 1989. This single novel of Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay 
                shows how Indian film makers adapt novels. 
                 
                       The objective of this paper is to focus on such an adaptation the–  adaptation of the 
                distinguished Indian English writer R.K.Narayan’s soul stirring English novel The G uide
                (1958) for the Hindi filmG uide (1965), which is remembered for its brilliant dciretion by 
                Vijay Anand, exceptional music by Sachin Dev Burman, and finally for the outstanding 
                performance by Dev Anand and Waheeda Rehman. The enormous literary success of the 
                novel, which won the Sahitya Akademi Award in 1961, brought offers of a  Broadway
                 24    Dutta 
                
               dramatization in New York and two film versions produced by Dev Anand in Hindi and Pearl 
               Buck and Ted Danielewski in English, all of which made Narayan acutely unhappy since he 
               felt that none of them captured the spirit of the story, and he did not like the unwarranted cuts 
               and changes. This is true from the aesthetic view point but it is equally true that a film 
               director cannot afford to present the entire novel into his or her film version; he or she has to 
               select some of the most important aspects of the text so as to present the essence of it to the 
               audience. A film director is not bound to the original and he or she has every right to 
               eliminate or add some characters and incidents which are or are not there in the original text 
               in order to cater the taste of all sorts of public. In the process of adaptation every film director 
               recreates or gives new dimension to the original. The naïve and humble attempt in this paper 
               is to trace the changes made by Vijay Anand and to show how these changes made the fim al    
               grand success and received several awards and recognition in spite of Narayan’s strong 
               dislike. 
                       
                                                            II 
                                                              
                      Vijay Anand’s Hindi film  Guide  is a path breaking cinematic experience and is 
               perhaps one of the milestone films of the Indian cinema. The film boldly presents before us 
               the taboo subjects of extra marital relation when infidelity was considered a forbidden subject 
               in India. The film is one of the earliest efforts in the Indian film industry to depict both the 
               hero and the heroine in the negative shade. 
                
                      Dev Anand, the ever green actor and filmmaker plays the role of Raju, a fast-talking, 
               self-promoting tourist guide in the Rajasthani city of Udaipur. The movie starts from the 
               middle of the story with Raju being released from jail and then the story ruin fns lashback. 
               Once a wealthy and aged archaeologist named Marco (Kishore Sahu) and his young and good 
               looking wife Rosie (Waheeda Rehman) come to Raju’s city. Marco’s main purpose of 
               coming here is to do some research in the caves on the outskirt of thet y aci nd he hires Raju 
               as his guide. While Marco devotes himself to the discovery of caves, Raju takes Rosie on a 
               tour to a village to show her dance of King Cobra and there she begins to dance with the 
               Cobra. Raju is captivated by the impetuous beauty and amazing dancing skill of Rosie. Raju 
               learns about Rosie’s background that she is the daughter of ade  vdasi, the temple dancer, and 
                                                                             postscriptum    25 
               
              how she has become the wife of Marco. But Marco does not like Rosie’s dancing in his 
              house, so Rosie has to give up her passion of dancing. 
                    Meanwhile, Marco is totally engrossed in his work in the cave and ignores Rosie. As 
              a result Rosie tries to commit suicide by consuming poison. Upon knowing the incident 
              Marco returns from the cave to see Rosie but he gets furious when he sees Rosie fit and alive. 
              He accuses Rosie that her act of committing suicide was actually a drama; otherwise she 
              would have consumed more poison. In this way their relationship is getting worse and Rosie 
              again attempts to end her life when she finds Marco having an affair with a native girl in the 
              cave. But Raju saves her from committing suicide and inspires her to live in order to fulfil her 
              dream – to become a dancer. She finally comes out of the relation of being the wife of Marco 
              and it is here that Raj utakes her to his home. But this turns Raju’s family, friends and the 
              entire community against him. However, Raju develops love for Rosie and he helps Rosie to 
              embark on a dancing career and Rosie becomes Nalini, a superstar. 
                     
                    Rosie starts arranging a number of dance shows and earns a lot of money. As fame 
              and wealth come in, Raju becomes addicted to gambling and drinking. He finds happiness in 
              the luxurious and materialistic life but Rosie is not happy with money and aristocratic 
              lifestyle. Moreover, too many dance shows consume her passion for dance and she starts 
              feeling exhausted. One day, a parcel comes from Marco who sends a copy of his book, The 
              Cultural History of South India, in which he writes about his discovery of the new cave and 
              acknowledges, as he made the promise, that it is Raju, a local guide who helps him in his 
              work. Raju keeps the book out of the reach of Rosie. Within few days another thing happens 
              – Marco comes to visit Rosie but Raju does not permit Marco to meet Rosie. One day a ban k
              representative comes to Raju and informs him about a joint account that is in the name of 
              Marco and Rosie. Now Marco desires to close the account and wants to have the jewellery 
              released. The bank representative also tells Raju that the bank is handing over the jewellery to 
              Rosie on Marco’s wish, so the bank needs Rosie’s signature. All these make Raju feel jealous 
              and he does not want Marco to have any sort of contact with Rosie. Raju, who loves Rosie, 
              also fears of losing her. Hence, he forges Rosie’s signature. As a result he is sentenced to two 
              years imprisonment. 
                     
                    On the day of his release from the jail Raju’s mother (Leela Chitnis) and Rosie come 
              to pick him up but they are told that Raju was released six months ago because of his good 
                26    Dutta 
               
              behaviour in the jail. After being released from the jail Raju decides not to go back either to 
              Rosie or to his mother. He keeps wanderings alone until he finds a group of s adhuswith 
              whom he spends a night at a derelict temple in a small village called Rampuri.t  The nex
              morning, a farmer named Bhola (Gajanan Jagirdar) finds Raju sleeping under the orange 
              shawl, which one of the sadhus places upon him last night. Bhola thinks Raju as a holy man 
              and calls him “Swami Ji”. Bhola tells Raju that he is having a problem with his sister Maya 
              as she refuses to marry. Bhola requests Raju to do something. Raju tells Bhola to bring Maya 
              to him and he convinces Maya. Inspired by this, Bhola spreads the news in the village and 
              Raju is taken as a holy man by all the villagers. They brng fi oods and gifts for him and tell 
              their problems. Raju opens a school at the village, solves other problems and is living happily 
              with the villagers. One day, while sharing his childhood stories with the villagers Raju tells 
              the story of a holy man who saved a draught ridden village by fasting twelve days. 
                      
                     Ironically, after few days a draught and ensuing famine hit the village. Through the 
              miscommunication of a village fool, Raju’s words –th at he will not eat anything until the 
              villagers stop fighting in such a hard time  –are interpreted by the villagers that he will fast 
              for twelve days to bring rain, like the holy man of his earlier story. Thus Raju is trapped by 
              his own words. At first Raju opposes the idea and tells Bhola that there is no conn nectio
              between one’s fasting and the rain. He also tells Bhola that he is just an ordinary human being 
              like anyone of them or even worse – a convict who has undergone trial and jail for forgery. 
              But this confession makes Bhola to accept Raju as a holy manstr onglmore y and Bhola 
              alludes to the story of the dacoit Ratnakar who became Valmiki. So Raju reluctantly begins to 
              fast by seeing the indisputable faith of the villagers. With the fast there occurs in Raju a 
              spiritual transformation. As the fast goes on Raju’s fame spreads on, people from other places 
              come to see him and to take his blessing. Meanwhile, an American news reporter comes to 
              broadcast the whole thing. The reporter asks Raju whether he truly believes that the fast 
              would bring rain. Raju gives a very smart answer by saying, “There people have faith in me 
              and I have faith in their faith”. 
                      
                     Gradually Rosie, Raju’s mother and Gaffur, his friend and taxi driver come to see 
              whether this “Swami Ji” and their Raju is the same person. In this way Rajbauc gk ets 
              everyone whom he has lost a long time ago. But now he is caught between the tw–o  on the 
              one side a chance to get back his past life and on the other side there are thousands of people 
                                                                                    postscriptum     27 
                
               with their faith in him to bring rain and save their lives. His health starts falling and he thinks 
               about the meaning of his life. He gets enlightened by the concept that his past sins are washed 
               away by this torment .In this way the earlier Raju he knew has died and now the only thing 
               that remains is the spiritual guide, which is not subjected to death. All the people irrespective 
               of religion begin to pray to the Almighty to send rain in the earth. Finally rain comes and the 
               crowd rejoices but Rosie finds Raju dead and she begins to shed tears. Raju transcends 
               himself from a simple tourist guide to the spiritual guide of humanity. 
                
                                                           III 
                
                      Converting a novel into a screenplay is not just a matter of culling dialogues from the 
               pages of the novel. A film director has to keep many things in his mind, such a hows – to 
               compress the matter of a novel usually comprising of more than three hundred pages into 
               three hours or so, how faithful to the original work should the film version strive to be, what 
               are the things to be eliminated from the original text and what new be added, how the 
               audience take the film version of a popular text and so on. 
                
                      The first and most important issue for a filmmaker or screenwriter is that no matter 
               what the length of the original is, the film version must not go beyond three hours or so. For 
               example, the 2002 adaptation of Dickens’s David Copperfie(l1849 d    – 50) compresses the 
               novel of eight hundred pages into one hundred and eighty minutes. Vijay Anand’s Guide 
               takes one hundred and seventy minutes to present Narayan’s story of two hundred and forty 
               seven pages. This is not an easy task as condensation results in the omission of materials 
               from the novel which the novelist apparently considers to be essential to his or her original 
               conception. The reduction of a long work to a comparatively short fquiilmre rs me any 
               omissions. Lester Asheim in “From Book to Film: Summary” opines, “The necessity to a 
               comparatively short film play requires many omissions. The necessity to condense, however, 
               dictates only that something must be eliminated, but does not presicbre what that something 
               shall be”(260). So the script writer should exclude carefully only the events or characters that 
               are not essential to the new presentation or that do not hamper the plot for their omissions. In 
               his Hindi film Guide Vijay Anand excluded the whole childhood days of Raju which is 
               described vividly by Narayan in his novel. Through the childhood days of Raju, Narayan 
               presents the socio-political, cultural as well as economic conditions of India of the 1950s or 
                28    Dutta 
               
              1960s, such as – the life before and after the advent of railways in Narayan’s fictional town 
              Malgudi having the typical milieu of the then India, the life in the py oslchool, the impact of 
              urbanization upon the village life etc. which are totally absent in the film. Also the film does 
              not present the picture of the world inside the jail and life style of the prisoners. Narayan is 
              not only famous for his minute observation but also for his use of humour that can be 
              beautifully traced in the conversation between Raju and the barber outside the jail. These 
              events are omitted in the film version primarily because they do not further the plot nor their 
              omission hampers the plot. 
                      
                     The filmmaker not only eliminates some incidents from the original, but also makes 
              some major changes while adapting his film from a novel and here comes the question of the 
              filmmaker’s fidelity to the original text. In Reading the Mov (195ie 7), William Costanzo 
              quotes George Blueston, one of the first critics to study film adaptation of literature. Blueston 
              believes that filmmaker is an independent artist, “not a translator for an established author, 
              but a new author in his own right” (62). What actually a filmmaker does is to refashion the 
              spirit of the story with his or her own vision and tools. 
                      
                     There are some reasons behind the changing of some of the events of the original text. 
              The first reason is simply because the changes demanded by a new medium. Film and 
              literature have their own tools for manipulating narrative structure. In a novel a new chapter 
              may take us back to a different time and place in a narrative, where as in a film we may go 
              back to the same time and place through the use of various techniques like flashback, crosscut 
              or dissolve. Vijay Anand does the same thing in Guibdey e  mploying these techniques to 
              make the complex narrative of Narayan coherent. Narayan starts his novel with in-medias-res 
              and then goes back to the past and frequently changes the time frame from present to past and 
              past to present which makes his narrative too complex. The Guide is his only novel which has 
              such a complex narrative structure which makes the reader puzzled. Though the film begins, 
              like the novel, from the middle of the story and then harks back to the past, it avoids the 
              frequent shifting of time frame like that of the novel. Instead, the film shows a simple, clear 
              cut and coherent narration. The “unity of action” is observed more closely on the screen than 
              in the text. It helps the audience to understand the story more easily and clearly than the 
              novel. 
                      
                                                                                         postscriptum       29 
                 
                        Lester Ascheim points out that the “narrative viewpoint is consistently omniscient and 
                usually impersonal in the film adaptations, regardless of the viewpoint employed by the 
                novelist” (262). As a result, the intention of the author as personal commentator on the action 
                or theme in a novel is almost absent in a film. In Narayan’s novel the story is narrated 
                sometimes from the viewpoint of Raju, sometimes from that of Rosie or sometimes authorial 
                narrator intrudes into the story to remind us about the present situation and comment on the 
                characters’ morality. But in the film the authorial intrusion is completely absent and mostly 
                the film is shown from the omniscient or impersonal perspective. The objective omniscience 
                of the camera eye makes the services of an interpreter unnecessary. While the reader of a 
                novel is free to interpret any events or actions or comments of the characters, the spectator of 
                a film is a passive consumer of the actions as they occur before his or her eyes. Film does not 
                allow us to get the same freedom as a novel does –to  interact with the plot or characters by 
                imagining them in our mind. For some people, this is often the most frustrating aspect of 
                turning a novel into film. 
                         
                        Often filmmakers make changes to highlight new themes, emphasise different traits in 
                a character or even try to solve problems they perceive in the original work. Allan Cubbit, 
                who wrote the screenplay for the 2001 film Anna Karenina, says in an interview that he 
                always felt Vronsky’s suicide attem  wpats “under motivated” and therefore he tried to 
                strengthen the character’s sense of rejection and humiliation in the film version. In his novel, 
                Narayan presents the major characters – Raju, Rosie and Marco – not as the ‘flat characters’ 
                but as complex and conflicting. Both the novel and the film present Raju, Rosie and Marco 
                not as the typical hero, heroine and villain, rather a mixture of all qualities in each of them. 
                 
                        The hero, Raju in the film is seen as falling in love with Rosie particularly after 
                saving Rosie from committing suicide as she is totally frustrated with Marco, her eccentric 
                husband, who values his work more than his wife and she wants to come out from the 
                relationship. Finally Rosie does so and this prompts Raju to take her and give he a shr elter. 
                He has both sympathy and love for Rosie. Raju has already admired Rosie’s dance and in this 
                critical situation stretches his helping hands and calms her by saying that committing suicide 
                is a sin and she should live to pursue her dream to be–    come a famous dancer. This is how 
                they come close to each other and develop their love. But in the novel Raju develops his love 
                and passion for Rosie much before. In spite of being well aware of the fact that Rosie is a 
                30    Dutta 
               
              married woman Raju goes on loveing wth hei  r by ignoring the warnings of his mother, his 
              maternal uncle and Gaffur. This negative shade in the character of Raju is shown in the film 
              in a polished way: “Where Narayan’s Raju takes the first opportunity to worm himself into 
              Rosie’s bedroom, the ‘reel’ Raju is unfailingly noble never taking physical advantage of a 
              damsel in distress” (Bhattacharya 93). 
                      
                     The character of Rosie, like that of Raju, in the film is presented in such a way that we 
              cannot claim that Rosie is infidel to her husband Marco. Vijay Anand consciously introduces 
              a new scene in the film where Marco is seen as having a physical relationship with a native 
              girl in the cave, which is not there in the novel. Rosie rejects Marco only after seeing this. 
              She accepts Raju because in Raju she finds the loving and caring nature which is not there in 
              Marco and also because it is Raju who supports her to pursue her dream of becoming a 
              successful dancer. This is why in spite of being married Rosie lives with Raju. Vijay Anand 
              makes the characters of Raju and Rosie in such a way that the audience feel pity for them. 
              We may say that they are more sinned against than sinning. 
                      
                     The role of Marco, according to Dr. Nandini Bhattacharya, is also significantly 
              enacted by Kishor Sahu, an established ‘villain’ of Bollywood in the 1960s, thereby making 
              impression in the audience’s mind about Marco’s irredeemable ‘badness’. In R.K.Narayan’s 
              The Guide: New Critical Perspectives (2004), she further comments: 
                     ... unlike the academic, and inscrutable Marco othf e printed text, the ‘reel’ Marco 
                     surreptitiously drinks alcohol in the caves, and maintains illicit relationship with 
                     prostitutes, thereby forcing Rosie, as it were, to take the final and irrevocable step of 
                     leaving him for another man ( 93 ). 
               
                     Sometimes it is seen that the filmmaker shifts the setting of the original novel from 
              which the film is adapted, as it happens in the case o. Nf Gauiradeyan regretted that by 
              shifting the scene away from Malgudi, an imaginary small town in a conservative part of 
              South India to Jaipur, Rajasthan – in the north of India, the subtleties of the story had been 
              levelled down completely –“ By abolishing Malgudi, they had discarded my own value in 
              milieu and human characteristics” (Narayan 171). It is true that the change of the setting 
              naturally makes for alterations in the characterization, the values which motivate characters 
              and even the plot: 
                                                                             postscriptum    31 
               
                    Narayan’s Rosie, for instance, is part of a traditional and orthodox South Indian 
                    society, and an exponent of the strictly classical tradition of the Bharat Natyam, where 
                    the dancer actually performs an act of worship to Lord Shiva Nataraja through the 
                    dance. All these factors determine her character and her actions in the novel. By 
                    contrast, Wahida Rehman’s Rosie is far more cosmpolo itan – she performs dances 
                    which are typical Bollywood extravaganzas “in deliciously fruity colours and 
                    costumes”... This was obviously done to cater to the average Bombay film audience 
                    who might find Narayan’s Rosie too serious and complex for their taste (Sen 6). 
                     
                    However, the most discussed portion of the film is the ending which presents the 
              twelve day fasting of Raju in order to bring rain to the draught ridden village Rampuri. 
              During this period Raju gets back his mother and Rosie and there is oncreciliation among 
              them. Finally rain comes and Raju dies. This is how the movie ends but the novel has an open 
              ending and is ambiguous. It ends with Raju being staged down with his final words – “Velan, 
              it’s raining in the hills. I can feel it coming up under my feet, up my legs "( N- arayan, The 
              Guide 247). We are not told whether Raju dies or the rain comes. Regarding this change in 
              the film Narayan, in his autobiography My Days (1974), expresses his dissatisfaction: 
                    The most outrageous part of it was the last scene, in which an elaborate funeral and 
                    prolonged lamentation were added at short notice in order to placate eleven financiers 
                    who saw the final copy of the film tightly clutching the money bags and would not 
                    part with the cash unless a satisfactory mourning scene was added (174-5). 
              From the literary viewpoint it is true that the film’s ending destroys the spirit of the novel but 
              we cannot forget the fact that Vijay Anand ends the film in this way in order to fulfil the 
              demand of his audience. Years later, in his tribute to Narayan after his death in 2001, Dev 
              Anand said, “If only we had managed to ignore the commercial aspects, Gui cdeould have 
              made a milestone in the history of cinema ... and the author would have been a happier man” 
              (The Sunday Statesman: Literary Supplement, Calcutta, 20 May 2001: 3).  
                     
                    Songs and dialogues have an important place in Hindi cinema. Even there are many 
              Hindi films which are not so popular but the songs and dialogues of those films are very 
              popular. Vijay Anand’ sGuide gives us some ever green songs and dialogues which the 
              Bollywood film lovers can never forget. The music for the film was composed by Sachin Dev 
              Burman, the songs were written by Shailendra and were sung By Lata Mangeshkar, 
                32    Dutta 
               
              Mohammed Rafi, Kishor Kumar, Mnnaa  De and Sachin Dev Burman. The songs are used 
              significantly to deal with highly dramatic situation and to carry the narrative forward. The 
              songs also expressed the inner thoughts and feelings of the characters. Rosie’s feelings are 
              expressed beautifully through the songs like Aaj phir jeena ki tamanna he and Mohe chhal na 
              kia jaaya ... dekho nas aiyan beimaan; Raju’s helpless through Din dhal jaaya haai raat na 
              jay, Kaya se hogaya bewafa tere pyar meainnd   Wahan koun hai tera. Gata raha mera dil 
              tuhi meri manjij and Tere mere swapna aab saath saath hai reflect the romantic love between 
              Raju and Rosie and Allah megh de pani de reveals the plea of the draught affected helpless 
              people.There are many famous dialogues made by Raju and others in  Gwuihidech have 
              become so popular that we can hear these from the mouth of common people even today. 
              Some such dialogues are – Jab matlab se payer hota he, toh pyer se matlab nahi rahta [When 
              you love only for a reason, then there is no reason for love], Kausakm a, naam tera[H  is 
              work, your name], Dukh woh amrit hai jisse paap dhulte h [aiGrief is that holy water with 
              which sins get washed], Yaad mein nasha karta hoon aur nasha mein me yaad karta hoon[  I 
              drink when I remember you and I remember you when I drink]Jab aad,   mi apne naseeb ko 
              kosta rahta hai, uska naseeb bhi usko kosne lagta hai [A person who keeps cursing about his 
              destiny, his destiny also starts to curse him], Musibat aur zindagi ka kehte hai chitta tak ke 
              saath rehta hai [It is said that problems and life stay together until you die], Gandi naali se 
              nikla hua pani kabhi Gangajal nahi hot i[Water from the dirty gutter can never become the 
              holy water from the river Ganga] etc. 
                      
                     R. K. Narayan’s dislike did not stop the audience from embracing thei flm and make 
              it run in the cinema halls for many months. Beside its commercial success, the film received 
              many awards and recognition. Guide received the Certificate of Merit for the Third Best 
                                                       th
              Feature Film in Hindi at the prestigious 13 National Film Awards. National Film Awards 
              are given every year to honour films made across India. The film also created an impression 
                      th
              at the 14  Filmfair Awards (1967) as it won all the leading awards including Best Film, Best 
              Director (Vijay Anand) and Best Story (R.NKa.rayan). Dev Anand gave perhaps his best 
              performance in the title role that justifiably won him the Best Actor award. Waheeda Rehman 
              as Rosie with her exceptional dance won the Best Actress award. With his film Guide Vijay 
              Anand reached the peak of his creera  and established himself as a great filmmaker in the 
              Hindi film industry. 
               
                                                                             postscriptum    33 
               
                                                      IV 
               
                    It is often said that the printed text is, in some way, superior to and more moral than 
              the filmed version. It is true that “Typically the text version of a story offers a better literary 
              experience than the film does” (Duncan 721). But we cannot deny the fact that a text or a 
              novel is meant for a set of target readerst he–  so-called ‘literary people’, but a film is a 
              product of popular culture which caters to the taste of all sorts of people, whether literate or 
              not. So, it will be better not to criticize the film Guide for its deviation from the original novel 
              but to see it as something new and creative. The film has been received positively by the 
              Bollywood film lovers. Besides, Guide is perhaps the best film of Vijay Anand and its 
              popularity can be understood from its commercial success and from the awards it received. 
              We should not forget that the film was nominated as India’s entry for the Oscar. Forgetting 
              R.K.Naryan’s contention on the film, we should salute Vijay Anand and the whole team of 
              Guide for their bold attempt to make a film adapted from such a popular novel. To conclude, 
              Dev Anand and Waheeda Rehman’s Guide is a big hit film that holds a place of pride in the 
              history of Indian cinema. 
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
                34    Dutta 
               
                                                   Works Cited 
              Asheim, Lester. “From Book to Film: Summary.” The Quarterly of Film Radio and      
                          Television 6. 3 (1952): 258-73. JSTOR. Web. 7 Aug. 2014. 
              Bhattacharya, Nandini. R.K.Narayan’s The Guide: New Critical Perspectives. Delhi:  
                        Worldview Publication, 2004. Print. 
              Costanzo, Willam. Reading the Movie. National Council of Teachers of English: Urbana, 
                        1957. Print. 
              Duncan, Patricia H. “I Like the Book Better: Comparing Film and Text to Build Critical 
                     Comprehension.” The Reading Teacher 46. 8 (1993):720-5. JSTOR. Web. 7 Aug. 
                     2014.  
              Guide. Dir. Vijay Anand. Perf. Dev Anand, Waheeda Rehman, Kishor Sahu, Leela Chitnis,  
                        Gajanan Jagirder, Anwar Hussain. Navketan International, 1965. Film. 
              Harrington, John. Film And / As Literature. New Jersey: Prentic Hall, 1977. Print. 
              Narayan, R.K. My Days. Chennai: Indian Thought Publication, 1974. Print. 
              - - -. The Guide. Chennai: Indian Thought Publication, 1958. Print. 
              Sen, Krishna. Critical Essays on R.K.Narayan’s The Guide. Kolkata: Orient Longman 
                        Private Limited, 2004.  Print. 
               
              All translations from Hindi to English are done by the author. 
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
