                         postscriptum: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Literary Studies, Vol: 1 (January 2016) 
                                    Online; Peer-Reviewed; Open Access www.postscriptum.co.in 
                                                Dutta, Amar. “The Guide: … ” pp. 22-34 
           
          The Guide: Adaptation from Novel to Film 
           
          Amar Dutta 
          Guest Lecturer in English, Sarat Centenary College 
           
          Amar Dutta is presently working as a Guest Lecturer in English at Sarat Centenary College, Dhaniakhali, 
          Hooghly, where he studied undergraduate Honours course in English from 2009 to 2012. He completed his 
          M.A. in English from The University of Burdwan in 2014 and B.Ed. from the same university in 2015. His areas 
          of interest are film studies and modern literary theory. 
           
          Abstract 
          Adaptation in the film industry is nothing new. Alm otshtree-fourths of all films ever made have been 
          adapted from novels, plays or short stories of the classic literature in every language. Our Indian film 
          industry is of no exception. It is often said that the printed text is, in some way, superior to and more 
          moral than the filmed version. The objective of this paper is to focus on such adaptation–  the adaptation 
          of R.K.Narayan’s Sahitya Akademi Award winning novel The Guide to Vijay Anand’s film Guide. After the 
          release of the film Narayan was very unhapp ybecause he felt that it could not capture the spirit of the 
          story, and he did not like the unwarranted cuts and changes. This is true from the aesthetic view point, 
          but it is equally true that a film director is not bound to the original and he or sh eev herasy right to 
          eliminate or add some characters and incidents which are or are not there in the original text in order to 
          cater the taste of all sorts of public. In the process of adaptation every film director recreates or gives new 
          dimension to the original. The humble attempt in this paper is to trace the changes made by Vijay Anand 
          and to show how these changes made the film a grand success and received several awards and 
          recognition in spite of Narayan’s strong dislike. 
           
          Keywords 
          adaptation, film industry, infidelity, guide, sadhu 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
