                           Call for Papers: 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton 
                           Released: 3 April 2019 
                           The 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton will convene at the Adelaide Conveniton Centre, Adelaide,   
                           Australia from Sunday, 12 July through Friday, 17 July 2020. Scienitsts, engineers, and others interested in  
                           combusiton are invited to attend and paritcipate in this biennial world congress of The Combusiton Insittute. 
                           Symposium Agenda 
                           The technical program will consist of contributed papers and Work-in-Progress Poster (WiPP) sessions.  
                           Invited lectures, topical reviews, and special industry perspecitves will be presented by eminent specialists. 
                           Technical Program Co-Chairs  
                           Tim Lieuwen, Georgia Insittute of Technology, USA     Fei Qi, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China  
                           Colloquia Descripitons 
                           A total of 13 colloquium categories will be addressed at the 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton. Authors 
                           must indicate a choice of colloquium with their submissions.  
                           GAS-PHASE REACTION KINETICS including the kineitcs of hydrocarbons and oxygenated fuels, formaiton of gaseous 
                           pollutants, elementary reacitons, mechanism generaiton, reduciton and uncertainty quanitifcaiton.  
                           Michael P. Burke, Columbia University, United States; Guillaume Dayma, Université d'Orléans—CNRS/ICARE, France; 
                           Perrine Pepiot, Cornell University, United States; Raghu Sivaramakrishnan, Argonne Naitonal Laboratory, United 
                           States; Bin Yang, Tsinghua University, China; Judit Zádor, Sandia Naitonal Laboratories, United States. 
                           SOOT, NANOMATERIALS, AND LARGE MOLECULES including the formaiton, growth, and destruciton of soot, PAHs, 
                           carbon nanostructures, and other nanoscale materials. Per-Erik Bengtsson, Lund University, Sweden; Yuyang Li, 
                           Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China; Michael E. Mueller, Princeton University, United States; William Roberts, King 
                           Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia; Xiaoqing You, Tsinghua University, China. 
                           DIAGNOSTICS including the development and applicaiton of diagnositc techniques and sensors for the 
                           understanding and control of combusiton and reacitng lfow phenomena. Aamir Farooq, King Abdullah University of 
                           Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia; Tina Kasper, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany; Jeffrey A. Sutton, Ohio 
                           State University, United States; Wolfgang Meier, Deutsches Zentrum für Lutf- und Raumfahrt e.V., Germany. 
                           LAMINAR FLAMES including their igniiton, structure, propagaiton, exitnciton, stabilizaiton, dynamics, and 
                           instabiliites. Zheng Chen, Peking University, China; Christos E. Frouzakis, ETH Zürich, Switzerland; Fabien Halter, 
                           Université d'Orléans—CNRS/ICARE, France; Zuohua Huang, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China; Jeong Park, Pukyong 
                           Naitonal University, Republic of Korea; Eric L. Petersen, Texas A&M University, United States; Bruno Renou, CORIA, 
                           INSA Rouen Normandie, France. 
  
