                           Call for Papers: 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton 
                           Released: 3 April 2019 
                           The 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton will convene at the Adelaide Conveniton Centre, Adelaide,   
                           Australia from Sunday, 12 July through Friday, 17 July 2020. Scienitsts, engineers, and others interested in  
                           combusiton are invited to attend and paritcipate in this biennial world congress of The Combusiton Insittute. 
                           Symposium Agenda 
                           The technical program will consist of contributed papers and Work-in-Progress Poster (WiPP) sessions.  
                           Invited lectures, topical reviews, and special industry perspecitves will be presented by eminent specialists. 
                           Technical Program Co-Chairs  
                           Tim Lieuwen, Georgia Insittute of Technology, USA     Fei Qi, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China  
                           Colloquia Descripitons 
                           A total of 13 colloquium categories will be addressed at the 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton. Authors 
                           must indicate a choice of colloquium with their submissions.  
                           GAS-PHASE REACTION KINETICS including the kineitcs of hydrocarbons and oxygenated fuels, formaiton of gaseous 
                           pollutants, elementary reacitons, mechanism generaiton, reduciton and uncertainty quanitifcaiton.  
                           Michael P. Burke, Columbia University, United States; Guillaume Dayma, Université d'Orléans—CNRS/ICARE, France; 
                           Perrine Pepiot, Cornell University, United States; Raghu Sivaramakrishnan, Argonne Naitonal Laboratory, United 
                           States; Bin Yang, Tsinghua University, China; Judit Zádor, Sandia Naitonal Laboratories, United States. 
                           SOOT, NANOMATERIALS, AND LARGE MOLECULES including the formaiton, growth, and destruciton of soot, PAHs, 
                           carbon nanostructures, and other nanoscale materials. Per-Erik Bengtsson, Lund University, Sweden; Yuyang Li, 
                           Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China; Michael E. Mueller, Princeton University, United States; William Roberts, King 
                           Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia; Xiaoqing You, Tsinghua University, China. 
                           DIAGNOSTICS including the development and applicaiton of diagnositc techniques and sensors for the 
                           understanding and control of combusiton and reacitng lfow phenomena. Aamir Farooq, King Abdullah University of 
                           Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia; Tina Kasper, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany; Jeffrey A. Sutton, Ohio 
                           State University, United States; Wolfgang Meier, Deutsches Zentrum für Lutf- und Raumfahrt e.V., Germany. 
                           LAMINAR FLAMES including their igniiton, structure, propagaiton, exitnciton, stabilizaiton, dynamics, and 
                           instabiliites. Zheng Chen, Peking University, China; Christos E. Frouzakis, ETH Zürich, Switzerland; Fabien Halter, 
                           Université d'Orléans—CNRS/ICARE, France; Zuohua Huang, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China; Jeong Park, Pukyong 
                           Naitonal University, Republic of Korea; Eric L. Petersen, Texas A&M University, United States; Bruno Renou, CORIA, 
                           INSA Rouen Normandie, France. 
  
                       Call for Papers: 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton 
                       Colloquia Descripitons (conitnued) 
                       TURBULENT FLAMES including their igniiton, structure, propagaiton, exitnciton, stabilizaiton, dynamics, and 
                       instabiliites. Bénédicte Cuenot, CERFACS, France; Evatt R. Hawkes, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia; 
                       Akihiro Hayakawa, Tohoku University, Japan; Santosh Hemchandra, Indian Insittute of Science, Bangalaore, India; 
                       Nicolas Noiray, ETH Zürich, Switzerland; Adam Steinberg, Georgia Insittute of Technology, United States; Yue Yang, 
                       Peking University, China. 
                       SPRAY, DROPLET, AND SUPERCRITICAL COMBUSTION including atomizaiton, combusiton of droplets, sprays, and 
                       supercriitcal lfuids. Matthias Ihme, Stanford University, United States; S. Alex Schumaker, Air Force Research 
                       Laboratory, United States; Laurent Selle, Insittut de Mécanique des Fluides de Toulouse, France; Stefan Will,  
                       Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany. 
                       DETONATIONS, EXPLOSIONS, AND SUPERSONIC COMBUSTION including lfame acceleraiton, DDT, and pulse-
                       detonaiton-, constant volume combusiton-, and scramjet-engines. Kareem Ahmed, University of Central Florida, 
                       United States; Klaus Hannemann, German Aerospace Center, Germany; Jiro Kasahara, Nagoya University, Japan;  
                       Keith R. McManus, GE Research, United States; Alexei Poludnenko, Texas A&M University, United States. 
                       SOLID FUEL COMBUSTION including fundamental aspects related to pyrolysis, oxidaiton, gasiifcaiton, and ash 
                       formaiton from coal, biomass, and wastes, as well as combusiton of propellants and metals. Satya R. Chakravarthy, 
                       NCCRD, IIT Madras, India; Osvalda Senneca, Isittuto di Ricerche sulla Combusitone del Consiglio Nazionale delle 
                       Ricerche, Italy; James C. Sutherland, The University of Utah, United States; Hiroaki Watanabe, Kyushu University, 
                       Japan; Hongwei Wu, Curitn University, Australia; Hong Yao, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China.  
                       FIRE RESEARCH including fundamental aspects of igniiton, burning, spread and suppression of ifre, as well as 
                       applicaitons to building ifre and urban/wildland ifre safety. Simo Hositkka, Aalto University, Finland; Longhua Hu, 
                       University of Science and Technology of China, China; Samuel L. Manzello, Naitonal Insittute of Standards and 
                       Technology, Japan; Bart Merci, Ghent University—UGent, Belgium; Yuji Nakamura, Toyohashi University of 
                       Technology, Japan; Stanislav I. Stoliarov, University of Maryland, United States; Dong Zeng, FM Global, United States. 
                       STATIONARY COMBUSTION SYSTEMS AND LOW CARBON COMBUSTION TECHNOLOGIES including combusiton in 
                       staitonary power generaiton, lfuidized beds, incineraiton, uitlity boilers, industrial applicaitons, NO  and SO  
                                                                                                         x      x
                       reduciton, MILD combusiton, oxy-fuel combusiton, chemical looping, and CO  capture. James Dawson, NTNU, 
                                                                                      2
                       Norway; Chrisitan Hasse, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany; N. Swaminathan, Cambridge University, United 
                       Kingdom; Paul Papas, United Technologies Research Center, United States; Sang Hee Won, University of South 
                       Carolina, United States; Hai Zhang, Tsinghua University, China. 
                       RECIPROCATING INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES including device-speciifc aspects of fuels research, emissions, 
                       direct injeciton, and combusiton dynamics (e.g. igniiton, quenching). André L. Boehman, University of Michigan, 
                       United States; Sebasitan Kaiser, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany; Magin Lapuerta, University of Casitlla-La 
                       Mancha, Spain; Yi Yang, University of Melbourne, Australia; Mingfa Yao, Tianjin University, China. 
                       GAS TURBINE AND ROCKET ENGINE COMBUSTION including propulsion and power generaiton, as well as device-
                       speciifc aspects of fuels research, emissions, stability, and combusiton dynamics (e.g. igniiton, quenching, 
                       thermoacousitcs). Mirko Bothien, Ansaldo Energia, Switzerland; Benjamin Emerson, Georgia Insittute of Technology, 
                       United States; Robert Gordon, The University of Melbourne, Australia; Malissa Lighftoot, Air Force Research 
                       Laboratory, United States; Jacqueline O'Connor, Pennsylvania State University, United States; William Proscia,  
                       Pratt & Whitney, United States. 
                       NEW CONCEPTS including assisted combusiton (plasmas, electric and magneitc ifelds), catalysis, fuel synthesis and 
                       transformaiton, micro-channel reactors, integrated process intensiifcaiton, fuel cells, and electrolysis.               
                       Joseph K. Lekfowitz, Technion – Israel Insittute of Technology, Israel; John Mantzaras, Paul Scherrer Insittute, 
                       Switzerland; Li Qiao, Purdue University, United States; Wenitng Sun, Georgia Insittute of Technology, United States; 
                       Stephen D. Tse, Rutgers University, United States. 
  
            Call for Papers: 38th Internaitonal Symposium on Combusiton 
            Seleciton of Papers for Presentaiton and Publicaiton 
            The seleciton of papers is based on the quality and scienitifc rigor of the submissions evaluated in a peer-review 
            process. Authors are highly encouraged to provide assessment of experimental/numerical uncertainty and its 
            impact on the interpretaiton of results and conclusions. The Colloquium Co-Chairs (CCCs) will solicit and evaluate 
            written reviews in their topic area. The reviews will be sent to authors, a rebuttal will be requested, and when 
            necessary, examined by the original reviewers. Based on this, CCCs will recommend papers for presentaiton to assist 
            the Program Co-Chairs (PCCs) in the assembly of the ifnal symposium program. All accepted papers will be arranged 
            into parallel sessions for oral presentaiton. Publicaiton in the Proceedings of The Combusiton Insittute is determined 
            by the Proceedings editorial board, and is not guaranteed based on symposium presentaiton seleciton. Evaluaiton of 
            manuscripts for publicaiton begins with reviewing the decisions of the CCCs and PCCs. Authors of papers considered 
            for publicaiton will be requested to submit a revision, which will be reviewed by the editorial board, potenitally 
            consulitng addiitonal reviewers. Addiitonal revisions may be requested during the process. Final publicaiton decisions 
            will then be made.  
            Instrucitons to Authors of Contributed Papers 
            Please read the instrucitons on the submission site carefully before submiittng a paper. 
            07 November 2019: Due date is 23:59 Paciifc Standard Time (GMT-8hrs) for receipt of completed paper. 
            Week of 2 March 2020: Authors noitifed of acceptance for presentaiton at the symposium. 
            For instrucitons on submission of papers, visit The Combusiton Insittute website: CombusitonInsittute.org. 
            Work-in-Progress Posters (WiPPs) 
            To provide a forum for presentaiton and discussion of work in progress, poster sessions will be scheduled to run 
            concurrently with contributed oral sessions. Presentaiton in Work-in-Progress Poster (WiPP) sessions will be 
            determined on the basis of a one-page abstract. A full-length paper is not required. The posters presented in WiPP 
            sessions will not be published in the Proceedings of The Combusiton Insittute. The sessions will be organized by the 
            WiPP Co-Chairs: Nicole J. Labbe, University of Colorado Boulder, United States; Zeynep Serinyel, Université d'Orléans, 
            France; Zhen-Yu Tian, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. 
            Deadline for WiPP Submissions: 
            15 April 2020: Due date is 23:59 Paciifc Standard Time (GMT-8 hrs) for receipt of abstracts.  
            22 April 2020: Authors noitifed of decision for Work-in-Progress Posters. 
            Carefully follow all WiPP instrucitons on The Combusiton Insittute website: CombusitonInsittute.org. 
            Registraiton, Locaiton, and Accommodaitons 
            For more informaiton about symposium registraiton, local arrangements and attracitons, and travel accommodaitons, 
            visit the symposium website: CombusitonSymposia.org. 
  
