          EARTHQUAKE SAFETY PROCEDURES        
            
           
          Introduction 
          It is not possible to prevent earthquakes orchange the likeliho      od of an earthquake occurring. 
          However, we can greatly increase our chances of safety and survival, by being aware and pre-
          pared. Since knowledge and preparation are keys to your survival during and after an earth-
          quake, you should take steps to become informed. 
           
          Dangers Associated with Earthquakes 
             •  The actual movement of the ground in an earthquake is seldom the direct cause of injury 
                 or death. Most casualties resung objects alt from fallind debriscolla or psing structures. 
                 Injuries are commonly caused by:  
             •  Partial building collapse, such as falling masonry, collapsing walls, falling ceiling plaster, 
                 etc.  
             •   Flying glass from broken windows.  
             •   Overturned bookcases, filing cabinets, fixtures, furniture, office machines and appliances.  
             •  Fires, broken gas lines, etc. These dangers may be aggravated by lack of water due to 
                 broken mains.  
             •   Fallen power lines.  
             •   Inappropriate actions resulting from panic.  
           
          Earthquake Safety Guidelines 
             •  Remain Calm. Sound usually precedes earthquake motion by a split second. If you have 
                 developed the correct earthquake responses in your mind before a quake, this split sec-
                 ond is enough time to activate your automatic reactions. If you stay calm, you will be bet-
                 ter able to assess your situation. The rolling and roaring may terrify you, but unless 
                 something falls on you, the sensations probably won't hurt you. Try talking yourself 
                 through the violent motion phase. This will release stress and others may take courage 
                 and follow your reasoned restraint. Think through the consequences of any action you 
                 plan to take.  
           
             •   If you are indoors, stay there. If you are in danger:  
                    o  Get under a sturdy table, desk or bed.  
                    o  Brace yourself in an inside corner away from windows.  
                    o  Move to an inner wall or corridor. (A door frame or the structural    frame or inner 
                       core of the building are its strongest points and least likely to collapse. They will 
                       also break the impact of any falling objects).  
                    o  In an apartment building the safest place is by the central reinforced core of the 
                       building, which is usually located by the elevator well.  
                    o  Choose shelter which will provide an airspace if it cses. If your furniture shel-ollap
                       ter moves, stay under it and follow it around the apartment.  
                    o  Watch for falling objects - plaster, bricks, light fixtures, pots and pans, etc.  
                    o  Stay away from tall shelves, china cabinets and other furniture, which might slide 
                       or topple over.  
                    o  Stay away from windows, sliding glass doors, mirrors.  
                    o  Grab anything handy (blanket, pillow, tablecloth, newspapers, box, etc.) to shield 
                       your head and face from failing debris and splinting glass.  
                    o  Don't be alarmed if the fire alarm or sprinklers go off.  
                                                        - 1 - 
