          EARTHQUAKE SAFETY PROCEDURES        
            
           
          Introduction 
          It is not possible to prevent earthquakes orchange the likeliho      od of an earthquake occurring. 
          However, we can greatly increase our chances of safety and survival, by being aware and pre-
          pared. Since knowledge and preparation are keys to your survival during and after an earth-
          quake, you should take steps to become informed. 
           
          Dangers Associated with Earthquakes 
             •  The actual movement of the ground in an earthquake is seldom the direct cause of injury 
                 or death. Most casualties resung objects alt from fallind debriscolla or psing structures. 
                 Injuries are commonly caused by:  
             •  Partial building collapse, such as falling masonry, collapsing walls, falling ceiling plaster, 
                 etc.  
             •   Flying glass from broken windows.  
             •   Overturned bookcases, filing cabinets, fixtures, furniture, office machines and appliances.  
             •  Fires, broken gas lines, etc. These dangers may be aggravated by lack of water due to 
                 broken mains.  
             •   Fallen power lines.  
             •   Inappropriate actions resulting from panic.  
           
          Earthquake Safety Guidelines 
             •  Remain Calm. Sound usually precedes earthquake motion by a split second. If you have 
                 developed the correct earthquake responses in your mind before a quake, this split sec-
                 ond is enough time to activate your automatic reactions. If you stay calm, you will be bet-
                 ter able to assess your situation. The rolling and roaring may terrify you, but unless 
                 something falls on you, the sensations probably won't hurt you. Try talking yourself 
                 through the violent motion phase. This will release stress and others may take courage 
                 and follow your reasoned restraint. Think through the consequences of any action you 
                 plan to take.  
           
             •   If you are indoors, stay there. If you are in danger:  
                    o  Get under a sturdy table, desk or bed.  
                    o  Brace yourself in an inside corner away from windows.  
                    o  Move to an inner wall or corridor. (A door frame or the structural    frame or inner 
                       core of the building are its strongest points and least likely to collapse. They will 
                       also break the impact of any falling objects).  
                    o  In an apartment building the safest place is by the central reinforced core of the 
                       building, which is usually located by the elevator well.  
                    o  Choose shelter which will provide an airspace if it cses. If your furniture shel-ollap
                       ter moves, stay under it and follow it around the apartment.  
                    o  Watch for falling objects - plaster, bricks, light fixtures, pots and pans, etc.  
                    o  Stay away from tall shelves, china cabinets and other furniture, which might slide 
                       or topple over.  
                    o  Stay away from windows, sliding glass doors, mirrors.  
                    o  Grab anything handy (blanket, pillow, tablecloth, newspapers, box, etc.) to shield 
                       your head and face from failing debris and splinting glass.  
                    o  Don't be alarmed if the fire alarm or sprinklers go off.  
                                                        - 1 - 
                •  Do Not Rush Outside. Stay on the same floor that you are on. Stairways may be broken 
                    and exits jammed with people. Do not use elevators as the power for elevators may go 
                    out and leave you trapped. The greatest danger from falling debris is just outside door-
                    ways and close to outer walls. If for safety reasons you must leave the building, choose 
                    your exits as carefully as possible.  
             
                •  If you are outside, stay there. Move away from the building, garage, walls, power poles 
                    and lampposts. Electric power lines are a serious hazard - stay away from fallen lines. If 
                    possible, proceed cautiously to an open area.  
             
                •  If you are in a moving car, stop. Stop asckly as safety permits in the bes qui                             t available 
                    space. Stay in your car. Don't stop where buildings can topple down on top of you. A car 
                    is an excellent shock absorber and will shake a lot on its springs during an earthquake, 
                    but it's a fairly safe shelter from which to assess your situation.  
             
                •  Avoid Fallen Power Lines. The possibility ofountering fallen liv enc              e wires is great during 
                    and after an earthquake. If you are on foot, make a wide path around the wires. If you are 
                    in the car and live wires have fallen acroshe car, remain where you are. Your car is s t
                    usually well insulated and will protect you from electric shock. Never assume that downed 
                    power lines are dead.  
             
            After An Earthquake 
              
            Within the First Several Minutes: 
             
                •  Remain Calm. Don't Panic. Try to calm and reassure others. Stop and take time to think. 
                    Wait until all motion has stopped. Do not run down stairs or outdoors. Be prepared for 
                    additional shockwaves.  
             
                •  Do not light matches, cigarettes or turn on electrical switches. Flashlights are one of the 
                    best light sources after a damaging earthquake. Proceed with extreme caution.  
             
                •  Protect hands and feet from broken glass or debris. Keep head and face protected (hard-
                    hat, blanket, tablecloth, etc.)  
             
                •  Make a quick check for injuries or trapped people. Provide emergency first aid if needed. 
                    Do not try to move seriously injured persons unless they are in immediate danger from 
                    further injury.   
             
                •  Turn off all appliances and offic. Extinguish all open flames. Check pe machines                                                                    ower 
                    lines and cords. If problems exist in electrical lines or gas lines the mains should be shut 
                    off.  
             
                •  It may be necessary to draw a moderate amount of cold water in bathtubs and sinks and 
                    other containers, in case service should be disrupted.  
                                                                   - 2 - 
              During the Next Several Hours: 
               
                   •  Do not operate electrical switches, appliances or open-flame equipment if gas leaks are 
                        suspected. Sparks or flames can ignite gas from broken lines causing an explosion.  
               
                   •  Tend further to injured or trapped persons. Try to get help if necessary. If a person is 
                        trapped and you can free him without injur yourself, remove debris piece-by-piecy toe 
                        starting with the top of the pile.  
               
                   •  Be prepared for aftershocks - they are weaker than the main shock but can cause addi-
                        tional damage and psychologic trauma. Watch out for other possible dangers, whical                                                                                                                                                            h 
                        may follow an earthquake, such as fire, flood, landslide or TSUNAMI (tidal wave).  
               
                   •  Turn on a battery radio to receive disaster instructions. Use telephones only to report ex-
                        treme emergency situations.   
               
                   •  Inspect your work area carefully for structural damage. Carefully open exit doors - they 
                        sometimes jam. The initial quakage the structure and an aftershock could e may dam
                        knock down weakened walls. Use extreme caution when moving around in damaged ar-
                        eas - they may collapse without warning. Check to see that sewage lines are intact be-
                        fore flushing toilets.  
               
                   •  You should not try to get home until government authorities say it is safe, which will be 
                        when the worst fires are under control and the streets have been cleared. This may hap-
                        pen quickly or it maynger (perhaps 72 hours or more take lo                              ). You should advise your 
                        family that in the event of a major earthquake you maybe retained at work. When possi-
                        ble notify your family about your well being.  
               
                   •    Don't go outside sightseeing. Keep streets clear for passage of emergency vehicles. Your 
                        presence might hamper rescue and other emergency operation  
               
                                                                                - 3 - 
