                                         1 
              
                                                       European Legal Studies 
                                                  Etudes Européennes Juridiques 
                                
                                          
                                          
                              RESEARCH PAPERS IN LAW 
                                          
                                       2/2011 
                                          
                                    Dominik Hanf 
                                          
                                          
                                          
             The ENP in the light of the new “neighbourhood clause” (Article 8 TEU) 
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                   
                                          
              
              
              
              
                                                        © Dominik Hanf, 2011 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
             European Legal Studies/Etudes Européennes Juridiques 
             Dijver 11 | BE-8000 Brugge, Belgium | Tel. +32 (0)50 47 72 61 | Fax +32 (0)50 47 72 60 
             E-mail law.info@coleurope.eu | www.coleurope.eu 
                                                                        2 
                       
                      The ENP in the light of the new “neighbourhood clause” (Article 8 TEU) 
                       
                                      (*)
                      Dominik Hanf  
                       
                       
                      to be published in : 
                      E.  Lannon  (ed.),  Challenges  of  the  European  Neighbourhood  Policy  (PIE/Lang,  Brussels 
                      2011) 
                          
                      This short contribution outlines the renewed constitutional framework in which the “European 
                      Neighbourhood  Policy”  (ENP)  is  to  be  integrated  and  further  developed  (1.)  and  briefly 
                      discusses its possible implications for the finalité of the neighbourhood relationship in general 
                      and of the ENP more specifically (2.). This constitutional perspective reveals three – already 
                                                                             1
                      well-known – conceptual problems of the ENP (3.).  
                       
                      1. The renewed constitutional framework 
                      The  fundamental  treaties  of  the  Union  did  not,  until  now,  contain  a  clause  specifically 
                      dedicated to the Union‟s relationship with its neighbours. The Treaty of Lisbon inserted a new 
                                            2                  3
                      provision – Article 8  – into the TEU,  thus conferring a constitutional status on the Union‟s 
                      relationship with its neighbours as of 1 December 2009. 
                       
                      1.1.     The new Article 8 TEU 
                      The relevant “neighbourhood clause”, figuring prominently in Title I TEU, contains a number 
                      of indefinite legal concepts, leaving much scope for interpretation, in particular with regard to 
                      its geographical and substantive scope. 
                      First,  Article  8  TEU  applies  to  “neighbouring  countries”.  Although  a  literal  reading  would 
                      suggest that it covers only countries sharing either a land border or a sea border with the 
                                                                                 
                      (*)  Dr.  iur.  (Mainz)  ;  Docteur en droit (Liège) ; Professor of European Union Law at the College of Europe 
                        (Bruges). 
                      1  This text was written in January 2010. Please note that two substantial contributions on Article 8 TEU could 
                        only be considered for a limited revision (mainly of the footnotes) in May 2011: D. Thym, “Artikel 8 EUV”, in: 
                        E. Grabitz/M. Hilf/M. Nettesheim (eds.), Das Recht der Europäischen Union: Kommentar (Beck, Munich 
                        2010) and P. Van Elsuwege/R. Petrov, “Article 8 TEU: Towards a New Generation of Agreements with the 
                        Neighbouring Countries of the European Union?” (forthcoming in European Law Review 2011).  
                      2 Article 8 TEU – which reproduces literally Article I-57 of the never ratified Treaty establishing a Constitution 
                        for  Europe  -  reads  as  follows :  “1.  The  Union  shall  develop  a  special  relationship  with  neighbouring 
                        countries, aiming to establish an area of prosperity and good neighbourliness, founded on the values of the 
                        Union and characterised by close and peaceful relations based on cooperation. 2. For the purposes of 
                        paragraph 1, the Union may conclude specific agreements with the countries concerned. These agreements 
                        may contain reciprocal rights and obligations as well as the possibility of undertaking activities jointly. Their 
                        implementation shall be the subject of periodic consultation.” 
                      3 Treaty establishing European Union (TEU), lastly modified by the Treaty of Lisbon (entered into force on 1 
                        December 2009), quoted according to the consolidated version  published in the Official Journal of the 
                        European Union 2010, p. C 83/1 et seq.  
                                                                        3 
                       
                                                                                    4
                      Union,  it  can  also  be  understood  in  a  broader  sense   as  to  include  “neighbours  of  the 
                                                                                                5
                      immediate neighbours”. The Union practice has taken the latter view.  
                      Secondly, the substantive policy covered by the new “neighbourhood clause” seems to be 
                      similarly  broad.  Its  objective  is  the  establishment  of  an  area  of  prosperity  and  good 
                      neighbourliness. The Union is thus encouraged to take potentially any political or economic 
                                                                                                6
                      measure suitable to achieve that aim. The term “special relationship”  suggests two things: on 
                      the  one  hand,  it  does  not  exclude  –  and  seems  indeed  to  tend  to  –  “deep”  forms  of 
                      cooperation  with  neighbouring  countries;  on  the  other  hand,  no  specific  single  “blueprint” 
                      model of cooperation is prescribed. “Differentiation” is already current practice in the Union‟s 
                      relations with its neighbours – be it within or outside the ENP developed since 2003. 
                                                                                            7
                      Thirdly, the area of prosperity and good neighbourliness is can  be achieved by means of 
                      “specific  agreements”:  Article  8  TEU  therefore  provides  a  new  and  specific  legal  basis 
                      empowering  the  Union  to  conclude  neighbourhood  agreements.  It  is  modelled  upon  the 
                                                     8
                      wording of Article 217 TFEU  which constitutes since the very foundation of the Community 
                      the legal basis for the Union‟s association agreements with third countries. One can, however, 
                      observe  one  difference:  the  new  legal  basis  does  not  explicitly  provide  for  “special 
                      procedures”, mentioning instead an obligation to monitor the implementation by means of 
                      “periodic consultation”. It is however recognised that the reference in Article 217 TFEU cannot 
                      be  understood  as  a  real  enabling  clause  since  special  procedures  are  part  of  many 
                      agreements which do not qualify as association agreements. It aims thus at making clear that 
                      Union law does not allow the participation of third states in the Union‟s institutions: so-called 
                                                                         9
                      “internal association” is consequently excluded.  
                      The imposition  of  periodic  consultations  throughout  the  implementation  of  neighbourhood 
                      agreements  by  Article  8.2  TEU  suggests  therefore  that  this  specific  form  of  association 
                      agreements shall – or at least can – be subject to closer and frequent inspection.10  
                       
                                                                                 
                      4 Although “neighbouring” is generally associated to terms like next, bordering, surrounding, connecting or 
                        adjacent, it can also mean “nearby” (not far away). As a noun, “neighbourhood” can mean a nearby region 
                        or an area. See Collins English Dictionary, Complete and Unabridged 6th Edition (HarperCollins Publishers 
                        2003). 
                      5 With the extension of the ENP‟s geographical scope to the Caucasus: including since the 2007-enlargement 
                        of the Union to Romania and Bulgaria, the EU has no direct border with Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
                      6 Plural, compare e.g. with the French (“des relations privilégiées”) or  German (“besondere Beziehungen”) 
                        versions. The term “special relationship” is however not further defined; the Treaty lacks also a definition of 
                        what could be considered as its opposite (“ordinary relationship”). 
                      7 The Union “may” conclude specific agreements, see Article 8.2. TEU. On the “optional character” of Article 
                        8.2 TEU see also D. Thym (footnote1) at 10-12. 
                      8  Ex-Article  310  TEC.  The  TEC  has  been  modified  and  renamed  into  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
                        European Union (TFEU) by Treaty of Lisbon. The TFEU is cited according to the consolidated version 
                        published in the Official Journal of the European Union 2010, p. C 83/1 et seq. 
                      9  See  Dominik  Hanf/Pablo  Dengler,  “Accords  d‟Association”,  in :  Commentaire  Mégret  (Publications  de 
                        l‟Institut d‟études européennes de l‟Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles 2004), 293 et seq. providing 
                        further references. 
                      10
                          Waldemar  Hummer,  “Artikel  I-57  EVV”,  in:  Christoph  Vedder/Wolff  Heintschel  von  Heinegg  (eds.), 
                        Europäischer  Verfassungsvertrag.  Kommentar  (Nomos,  Baden-Baden  2007),  p.  243  (at  21): 
                        “Manuduktionscharakter”. 
                                                                        4 
                       
                      1.2.     Consequences for the conclusion of association agreements with neighbouring 
                               countries 
                      On the procedural formal side, the recently reformed Treaty system provides a new – and 
                      more specific – instrument to be used by the Union when concluding association agreements 
                      with one or several of its neighbouring countries.11 This – read together with Declaration No 3 
                      annexed to the TEU12 – implies that Article 8 TEU is not confined to countries included in the 
                      current  ENP  but  applies  to  agreements  to  be  concluded  with  any  neighbouring  state. 
                      Modifications of existing association agreements meeting the substantive criteria set out in 
                      Article 8 TEU already concluded with such countries – such as the EEA Agreement – would 
                      hence, at least in principle, need to be based on Article 8 TEU, too.13 
                      This interpretation of Article 8 TEU as a new legal basis for concluding and adopting specific 
                      association agreements means that the latter will need to be adopted by the Council acting 
                                    14                                                   15
                      unanimously  after having obtained the Parliament‟s consent.  
                      On  the  substantive  side,  Article  8  TEU  allows  the  Union  to  conclude  neighbourhood 
                      agreements relating to any policy field falling within the realm of its powers. Such agreements 
                      could thus in principle range from mere coordination to very advanced – and institutionalised 
                      – forms of cooperation. The obvious question is hence whether or not this new model of 
                      specific neighbourhood agreements would not need to meet more demanding substantive 
                      criteria depending on the “deepness” of the relationship they intend to establish. 
                                                                                 
                      11
                         Article 216.1 TFEU makes clear that a legal basis for concluding international agreements can also be found 
                        in the TEU (“where the treaties so provide”). It is true that Article 8.2 TEU, although based on the wording of 
                        Article  217  TFEU,  does  not  explicitly  refer  to  “association”  and  also  uses  a  somewhat  more  cautious 
                        wording  (“may  contain  …  as  well  as  the  possibility  …”).  However,  it  allows  for  concluding  “specific” 
                        agreements enabling thus the Union to fulfill its task (“shall develop”) of establishing “special relationship” 
                        (Article 8.1 TEU) with a selective circle of (“neighbouring”) countries. The significance of such agreements 
                        for the Union is further highlighted by the fact that Article 8 TEU figures prominently in the very first part of 
                        the TEU. Article 8.2 TEU can therefore be seen as the specific legal basis (lex specialis to Article 217 
                        TFEU) for concluding association agreements with neighbouring countries. 
                      12
                         According to that Declaration on Article 8 TEU annexed to the Treaty of Lisbon, “the Union will take into 
                        account the particular situation of small-sized countries which maintain specific relations of proximity with it”. 
                      13
                         Hummer (footnote 10) at 22 seems to suggest a different reading on that point. This is also the position of D. 
                        Thym (footnote 1) who considers – based on the general premise that the legal reach of Article 8 TEU 
                        should not be overstretched (at 6) – that the Union remains entirely free in the choice of legal instruments to 
                        be  adopted  in  the  pursuit  of  a  comprehensive  neighbourhood  policy  (at  12).  Since  the  CJEU  does 
                        consistently uphold the principle that the choice of a legal basis cannot be left to the discretion of the 
                        political  institutions  but  needs  to  be  established  on  objective  criteria,  this  interpretation  comes  however 
                        close to denying Article 8 TEU a legal value of its own. Van Elsuwege/Petrov (footnote 1) suggest for such 
                        cases recourse to a “double legal basis”  – a solution which would only be available if “neighbourhood 
                        agreements” were subjected to the same procedural requirements as “ordinary” association agreements (on 
                        this see next footnote). 
                      14
                          The  unanimity  requirement  set  by  Article  218.8  TFEU  for  association  agreements  also  applies  to 
                        neigbourhood agreements. This follows from the fact that Article 8 TEU provides a lex specialis to Article 
                        217 TFEU and from the constitutional significance of such far-reaching agreements – which the Member 
                        States  recognized  explicitly  by  placing  Article  8  prominently  in  Title  I  of  the  TEU.  The  (somewhat 
                        unhistorical) alternative interpretation based on the purely textual argument that the term “association” is not 
                        mentioned expressis verbis at Article 8 TEU – and which would confine Article 8 TEU to a merely symbolic 
                        provision – is discussed by Van Elsuwege and Petrov (footnote 1). Although D. Thym (footnote 1, at 12 and 
                        20) conceives of Article 8 TEU as a mere alternative to other legal bases (and in particular to Article 217 
                        TFEU), he also considers that both the genesis and ratio of Article 8 TEU point to extending the unanimity 
                        requirement of Article 218.8 TFEU to neighbourhood agreements. 
                      15
                         Article 218.6 lit. a (i.) TFEU, which applies on the basis of the reasoning developed in the previous footnote. 
                        At any rate, an agreement based on Article 8 TEU will generally be “establishing a specific institutional 
                        framework by organising cooperation procedures” (Article 218.6 lit. a (iii.) TFEU), have important budgetary 
                        implications for the Union (Article 218.6 lit. a (iv.) TFEU) and concern matters falling under the EP‟s co-
                        decision powers (Article 218.6 lit. a (v.) TFEU). See also D. Thym (footnote 1) at 19. 
                                                                        5 
                       
                      On the one hand, the vagueness of the terms used in Article 8 TEU16 does not allow one to 
                      infer  precise  qualitative  criteria  from  the Treaty.  A  broad  interpretation  as  to  the  potential 
                      content of the agreements would also be supported by the practice developed over the past 
                      decades with respect to Article 217 TFEU: association agreements frame and organise a 
                      great  variety  of  relationships  ranging  from  development  cooperation  and  inter-regional 
                      economic cooperation to very advanced integration of non-Member States into core policies 
                      of the Union.17 
                      On the other hand, the genesis18 and also the wording19 of Article 8 TEU would suggest that 
                      “neighbourhood agreements” should aim at more advanced forms of substantive cooperation 
                      along the lines of the most advanced forms of association the Union has already established 
                      with some European third countries. Such a reading is not per se excluded by the fact that the 
                      Treaty refrains from establishing itself – and thus mandates the institutions of the Union to 
                      define – the relevant substantive criteria. Since the neighbourhood clause was established 
                      against the backdrop of the existing models of advanced cooperation with third countries such 
                      as the EEA-Agreement, and is also subject to substantive conditions,20 it could even be read 
                      as “constitutionalising” the concept of “integration without membership”. 
                      In sum, Article 8 TEU can be understood as a purely programmatic provision. An alternative, 
                      non-compulsory, yet slightly more ambitious, interpretation would consider the neighbourhood 
                      clause as a new legal basis to be used by the Union for engaging with third countries by 
                      means  of  “advanced”  agreements  for  “deep”  forms  of  institutional  and  substantive 
                      cooperation. The politically responsible institutions of the Union would of course have a wide 
                      margin of discretion when assessing which degree of association which might be feasible and 
                      desirable  with  regard  to  the  various  third  countries  of  the  Union‟s  neighbourhood.  This 
                      discretion would also extend to the question whether an association is worth being “crowned” 
                      by a specific neighbourhood agreement. However, it seems that the Union could use Article 8 
                      TEU as a constitutional tool, and perhaps even recognise it as a duty, to formally distinguish 
                      between  the  “better”  neighbours  and  the  others,  and  to  do  so  in  an  overall  consistent 
                               21
                      manner.  
                      This  implies  that  the  Union  is  thus  free  –  and  having  regard  to  its  “cooperation  and 
                      association taxonomy” perhaps even obliged – to impose e.g. economic conditions before 
                      “upgrading” an existing relationship with a given country by means of concluding  a more 
                      ambitious neighbourhood agreement. 
                                                                                 
                      16
                         Neighbourhood agreements “may contain” reciprocal rights and obligations etc., see Article 8.2 TEU. 
                      17
                          For an account see Hanf/Dengler (footnote 9). Van Elsuwege/Petrov (footnote 1) stress rightly that the 
                        classification of the agreements concluded by the Union with third countries has hitherto remained to a large 
                        extent a matter of politics, not law. 
                      18
                          Although  geopolitical  aspects  played  of  course  an  important  role  in  the  birth  of  the  ENP  and  of  the 
                        Convention‟s predecessor of Article 8 TEU, it seems that the latter‟s main rationale has been to establish a 
                        “constitutional” alternative to membership. See on this the text at sub-section 1.4.  
                      19
                         Article 8.1 TEU qualifies the relationship to be developed both geographically (neighbours) and with regard 
                        to  intensity  (“special”,  “close”)  and  the  specific  agreements  according  to  Article  8.2.  TEU  are  to  be 
                        concluded “for the purposes” of developing such twofold qualified engagements. 
                      20
                         See sub-section 1.3. below. 
                      21
                         In practice, this would be a demanding yet not necessarily unhealthy task – and, given the very nature of the 
                        exercise, subject to rather limited judicial review (procedure, motivation). 
                                                                        6 
                       
                       
                      1.3.     Possible limits: principle of cooperation and Union values  
                      Article 8 TEU imposes two conditions to be respected by the Union when developing its ties 
                      with neighbouring countries: the special relationship needs to be “based on cooperation” and 
                      also to be “founded on the values of the Union”. 
                      The cooperation principle seems to stress the obvious fact that the Union‟s relationship with 
                      the neighbourhood can only be shaped with the consent of the third countries concerned. 
                      From a formal point of view, this is already inherent in the fact that international agreements 
                      need to be concluded by the Union, on the one hand, and a neighbouring state, on the other 
                      hand. In substance, one might ask whether forms of very advanced integration (as opposed 
                      to mere cooperation) should be ruled out of the scope of Article 8 TEU. This appears however 
                      to  be  inconsistent  with both the programme set out in the neighbourhood clause and the 
                      Union‟s  consistent  association  practice.  A  sensible  interpretation  would  thus  consist  in 
                      understanding the cooperation principle as an exclusion of “internal associations” – i.e. the 
                      formal participation of third countries in the decision-making of the Union institutions.22 
                      More difficult to assess is the meaning and the scope of the condition according to which 
                      special relationship with neighbouring countries need to be “founded on” the values of the 
                      Union.23 This wording24 – which is borrowed from ex-Article 6.1 TEU25 and refers clearly to the 
                      political criteria to be met by the Member States of the Union26 - contrasts clearly with the 
                      softer “shall be guided” formula used in the general external action sections of the Treaty.27  
                      A  strict  interpretation  of  this  condition  would  signify  that  the  Union  could  only  enter  into 
                      “special relations” with neighbouring countries which do respect democracy, the rule of law, 
                      and human rights in the same way as the Union and its Member States. A wider interpretation 
                      would accept the neighbours‟ commitment to the Union‟s values without actually requiring an 
                      equivalent level of protection and/or application for the time being. Wording and context of 
                      Article 8 TEU sustain the former, more demanding interpretation. Applying such a standard to 
                      neighbourhood relations could however appear to be somewhat overdrawn if one considers 
                      that  deficiencies  in  the  implementation  of  Union  values  can  be  considered  as  temporary 
                      phenomena and thus should not necessarily qualify as absolute obstacles to the recognition 
                      of third countries as candidates for accession to the Union.28 
                                                                                 
                      22
                         In line with the common understanding of the reference to “special procedures” in Article 214 TFEU. 
                      23
                          These are set out in Article 2 TEU: “The Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, 
                        freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons 
                        belonging to minorities. These values are common to the Member States in a society in which pluralism, 
                        non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.” 
                      24
                         Inserted into the “neighbourhood clause” at the request of several members of the European Convention 
                        (see CONV 671/03, 14 April 2003). 
                      25
                         “The Union is founded on the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental 
                        freedoms, and the rule of law, principles which are common to the Member States.” 
                      26
                         See Article 49 TEU for candidate states for accession to the EU and Article 7 TEU for Member States. 
                      27
                         Article 21 TEU (“The Union's action on the international scene shall be guided by the principles which have 
                        inspired its own creation, development and enlargement, and which it seeks to advance in the wider world: 
                        …”) and Article 205 TFEU (“The Union's action on the international scene, pursuant to this Part, shall be 
                        guided by the principles, pursue the objectives and be conducted in accordance with the general provisions 
                        laid down in…”). 
                      28
                          More  recent  examples  provide  the  decisions  of  the  Union  to  grant  Turkey  and  Croatia  the  status  of 
                        candidate countries. 
                                                                        7 
                       
                      Hence, one could argue that Article 8 TEU impedes the Union from entering into special 
                      relationship with neighbouring countries refusing to commit themselves to the values of the 
                      Union. The same would be the case for countries actively obstructing such a commitment. 
                      Finally, the limitation would arguably also apply in an unsatisfactory situation where no signs 
                      of  improvement  are  shown  over  time.  The  conclusion  of  more  advanced  neighbourhood 
                      agreements  would  require  a  decent  record  –  or  at  least  a  process  of  considerable 
                      improvement – in terms of human rights protection, the rule of law and democracy. 
                       
                      1.4.     The Neighbourhood Clause and Accession 
                      The  roots  of  this  new  Treaty  clause  can  be  traced  back  to  a  rather  early  stage  of  the 
                      institutional reform process of the Union which lasted almost an entire decade.29 There is 
                      nevertheless no clear evidence for the reasons which led to the “constitutionalisation” of the 
                      Union‟s relations with its neighbouring countries.30 Some suspected that the main purpose of 
                      the clause was to confine neighbouring states to a permanent non-member status.31  
                      Closer analysis of the relevant Treaty articles does not confirm such fears. Qualifying under 
                      the neighbourhood clause does not entail in itself the disqualification of a third country from 
                      the accession: all “European” neighbours retain a right to apply for – but not necessarily to 
                      obtain32  -  Union  membership (Article 49 TEU).33 For these states, special neighbourhood 
                      relationship could in fact indeed constitute a preparation for accession. 
                      Since non-European neighbours were never given the right to apply for membership, Article 8 
                      TEU could not affect any right of these states with regard to accession. 
                       
                      1.5.     Result 
                      The new neighbourhood clause in the Treaty is essentially (but not exclusively) programmatic 
                      in nature. It stresses the importance of political and economic stability in the Union‟s “near 
                      abroad” while highlighting the Union‟s commitment to contribute to such stability by means of 
                      cooperation with the neighbouring states. 
                      The clause remains vague as to the content and form of the Union‟s neighbourhood policy, 
                      adding no substance to the existing constitutional provisos. As a result, the institutions of the 
                      Union continue to have a great margin of discretion as to policies, methods, instruments and 
                                                                                 
                      29
                         The Praesidium of the Convention for the Future of Europe proposed to reflect about a clause “defining a 
                        privileged relationship between the Union and its neighbouring States” in its first preliminary draft of 22 
                        October 2002 (see CONV 369/02, p. 16). A subsequent proposal was approved by the Convention without 
                        much debate (see the summary of the reactions, CONV 671/03, 14 April 2003) and has been only subject to 
                        minor editorial modifications in the subsequent IGCs. Note that a more sober version had been proposed in 
                        the so-called “Pénélope project”, an interesting yet largely ignored feasibility study worked out by senior 
                        Commission officials: “L'Union établit des relations privilégiées avec ses États voisins par des accords 
                        d'association.” (see Article 27, Relations avec les États voisins, in : F. Lamoureux e.a., Contribution à un 
                        avant-projet de Constitution de l‟Union européenne, document de travail, Bruxelles, 4 December 2003, p.9). 
                      30
                          It  seems that the President of the Convention made sure that the provision was maintained in the Draft 
                        Constitutional Treaty because he was personally convinced that EU-enlargement could not be pursued 
                        endlessly, see D. Thym (note 1) at 2 (with reference to Madallon, RTDE 2005, 493 at 516 et seq.). 
                      31
                          Originally,  the clause constituted a  specific section dedicated to “The Union and its Neighbours” neatly 
                        separated from the provisions on “Union Membership”. 
                      32
                         Article 49 TEU does not contain a right to accession but only imposes on the Union (i.e. chiefly the Council) 
                        to duly examine requests for membership. 
                      33
                         See also D. Thym (footnote 1) at 7 (and note 6). 
                                                                        8 
                       
                      institutional  frameworks to be adopted with regard to individual or groups of neighbouring 
                      states. The hitherto single traditional limit remains intact: “internal association” – participation 
                      of third countries in Union institutions – is precluded. Furthermore, it is possible – yet not 
                      mandatory – to infer from Article 8 TEU a duty of the Union to reserve the new instrument of 
                      “neighbourhood  agreements”  only  to  particularly  advanced  forms  of  institutionalised  and 
                      substantive relationship. 
                      The  new  constitutional  framework  for  shaping  the  Union‟s  neighbourhood  relations  does 
                      hence not appear to entail major consequences for the ENP as developed since 2003 with 
                      regard  to  the  eastern  and  southern  neighbouring  countries  (and  recently  somewhat 
                      “relaunched”  by  means  of  the  so-called  “Union  for  the  Mediterranean”  and  “Eastern 
                      Partnership” respectively). 
                      The new neighbourhood clause could however impact on the current ENP as far as it extends 
                      to third countries accounting for questionable records in terms of democracy, the rule of law 
                      and human rights since the “special relationship” needs to be founded on the values of the 
                      Union.  Even  if  this  limit  were  interpreted  cautiously,  the  Treaty  would  oppose  to  the 
                      development of closer relations with those neighbours defying - or only paying lip services to - 
                      democracy, the rule of law, and human rights as understood by the Union. The Union would 
                      also need to make sure that enhancing its relationship with such states would at least need to 
                      go hand in glove with a steady improvement in the respect of these values. 
                      In other words, the Treaty seems to impose since 1 December 2009 a constitutional duty on 
                      the  Union  to  apply  the  concept  of  “conditionality”  to  the  implementation  of  the  ENP  by 
                      ensuring the respect of its own values by neighbouring states. 
                       
                      2.  The “finalité” of the ENP 
                      As already seen, the new neighbourhood clause of the TEU is not overly explicit on the 
                      precise  form  the  “special  relationship”  between  the  Union  and  its  neighbouring  countries 
                      should take. 
                       
                      2.1.     “Outer limits” and the EEA as an “ideal type” model 
                      The main “outer limits” of neighbourhood relationships are however well established: on the 
                      one hand, they can include – and should indeed aim at – very advanced and institutionalised 
                      forms of association covering potentially all policy fields of the Union, provided that the values 
                      of the Union are at least generally respected. On the other hand, the Treaty excludes sharing 
                      Union institutions (“internal association”) with neighbouring states, be they non-members due 
                      to the geographical condition set out in Article 49 TEU or due to an explicit or implicit political 
                      decision (“protected” by the same Treaty provision) to keep a European state outside the 
                      Union.34 
                                                                                 
                      34
                         This implies that the creation of a common supranational “EEA-Plus” integrating the EU and its neighbours – 
                        an interesting idea de lege ferenda mentioned by Peter Xuereb during the Workshop – would require a 
                        revision of the EU Treaty. See ECJ, Opinion 1/1991 (EEA I), ECR I-6079.  
                                                                            9 
                         
                        The  association  coming  closest  in  practice  to  a  true  “area  of  prosperity  and  good 
                        neighbourliness”  –  and  hence  to  the  objective  of  the  neighbourhood  clause  –  is  the 
                        Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA). Like the ENP, it had originally been 
                        conceived as a far-reaching and consequently attractive alternative to Union membership. 
                        One could thus argue that qualified neighbourhood relations should ideally aim at achieving a 
                        degree of substantive economic and political integration comparable to the one established by 
                        the EEA (or the set of bilateral treaties concluded between the Union and Switzerland). 
                         
                        2.2.     Conditionality and “finalité” 
                        “Special” or “deep” relationships – which in particular in the context of economic integration 
                        entail rights and obligations granted to and imposed upon individuals - require the application 
                        of a common set of fundamental common principles. 
                        As already observed, the new neighbourhood clause of the Treaty contains one new element: 
                        the obligation imposed on the Union to apply a value-based conditionality in neighbourhood 
                        relations - which is more demanding than the mere value-orientation generally to be observed 
                        in the context of the Union‟s external action. 
                        This would also support the reading that an advanced relationship such as that established by 
                        the  EEA  could  be  considered  as  a  near  ideal  model  for  the  programme  set  out  in  the 
                        neighbourhood clause of the Treaty. 
                         
                        2.3.     Developing the neighbourhood area: the ENP as a transformation process 
                        If the “finalité” of Article 8 TEU is ultimately to be situated on the upper level of the so-called 
                        “Hallstein  scale”  (i.e.  a  substantive  economic  and  political  integration  stopping  short  of  a 
                        participation in the Union institutions), the “finalité” of ENP developed since 2003 is thus to 
                        organise the process which could one day lead to such result. 
                        The ENP follows a gradual – and differentiated – approach, taking existing agreements as a 
                        starting point and aiming at progressively “upgrading” the bilateral and multilateral relations. 
                        As already observed, this is in line with the largely programmatic character of Article 8 TEU: 
                        the provision recognises the admissibility of a pragmatic step-by-step advancement and also 
                        underlines  that  the  neighbourhood  area  should  be  characterised  by  relations  “based  on 
                        cooperation”.  
                        However,  the  development  of  a  “special  relationship”  is  nevertheless  to  be  subjected  to 
                        increasing value-based – i.e. far-reaching political – conditionality. 
                        Furthermore, since the ENP is in practice designed as a process which aims to progressively 
                        integrate the economically least developed neighbouring countries into a set of Union policies, 
                        it  also  requires  that  further  progress  be  made  conditional  on  the  fulfilment  of  a  set  of 
                        economic conditions. 
                                                                      10 
                       
                      Although the ENP can only be based on cooperation between the Union and its neighbours, 
                      and also requires efforts and adjustments on the Union side,35 its development will in practice 
                      (for both constitutional and economic reasons) imply in no small measure an alignment of the 
                      neighbouring countries to the Union standards and preferences. The Union’s ENP is thus in 
                      the first place an instrument to encourage and sustain political and economic reforms in the 
                      neighbouring countries concerned. This is also recognised in the relevant key documents 
                      defining the ENP and translates into the use, by the Commission, of identical or only slightly 
                      modified instruments which had been previously developed within the framework of its pre-
                      enlargement strategies. 
                       
                      3.  Problems of the ENP 
                      Measured against the objective set out in Article 8 TEU, the current ENP faces – even after its 
                      latest  development  following  the  version  following  the  introduction  of  the  “Union  for  the 
                      Mediterranean” and the “Eastern Partnership”36 – (at least) three well-known fundamental 
                                             37
                      conceptual problems.  
                       
                      3.1.     Process, not Policy 
                      Although “policy” is a relatively broad concept, the  presentation of the current ENP as a 
                      “Union policy” suggests a kind of single and coherent framework applying to all neighbouring 
                      countries. This is in line with the overarching objective of the Union to progressively define its 
                      own geographical borders and at the same time to develop close economic and political ties 
                      with its neighbours as a means to safeguard its own security understood in the largest sense 
                      of the word. 
                      In  reality,  the  existing  ties  with  the  many  different  neighbouring countries as  well as their 
                      interests and expectations with regard to the Union (and often also vice-versa) differ greatly. 
                      This means in practice that ENP has to be handled flexibly. Differentiation has thus become 
                      the key feature of the ENP – to such extent that one wonders whether its qualification as a 
                      “policy” is not misleading. 
                                                                                 
                      35
                        Suffice to mention visa – and more generally immigration – policy, gradual opening the agricultural markets, 
                        technical and financial assistance. 
                      36
                         Most recent assessments by the Union institutions include the Commission‟s and High Representative‟s 
                        Joint  Communications of 8 March 2011 (“A Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the 
                        Southern  Mediterranean”,  COM  (2011)  200  final)  and  25  May  2011  (“A  new  response  to  a  changing 
                        neighbourhood”, COM (2011) 303), and the Commission‟s Communication of 12 May 2011 (“Taking stock of 
                        the ENP”, COM (2011) 207). 
                      37
                        On the ENP see e.g. M. Cremona/C. Hillion, “L‟Union fait la force? Potential and Limitations of the ENP as 
                        an  Integrated  EU  Foreign  and  Security  Policy”  (EUI  Working  Paper  2006/39,  Florence  2006)  ;  M. 
                        Cremona/G. Meloni (eds.),  The ENP : A Framework for Modernisation ? (EUI Working Paper 2007/21, 
                        Florence 2007) ; C. Hillion, “Mapping out the new contractual relations between the European Union and its 
                        neighbours”,  12  (2007)  European  Foreign  Affairs  Review  169-182  ;  R.  Petrov,  “Exporting  the  Acquis 
                        Communautaire into the Legal Systems of Third Countries”, 13 (2008) European Foreign Affairs Review 33-
                        52 ; A. Albi, “The EU‟s „External Governance‟ and Legislative Approximation by Neighbours”, 14 (2009) 
                        European Foreign Affairs Review 209-230 ; F. Maiani/R. Petrov/E. Mouliardova (eds.) European Integration 
                        Without EU Membership: Models, Experiences, Perspectives (EUI Working Paper MPW 2009, 10, Florence 
                        2009) ; D. Kochenov, “The Eastern Partnership, the Union for the Mediterranean and the remaining need to 
                        do something with the ENP” (CRCEES Working Papers 2009/01) and the contributions to the present 
                        volume. 
                                                                            11 
                         
                        This is not just a matter of semantics. In the long run, misleading labelling – the rebranding of 
                        the Barcelona Process as a “Union” for the Mediterranean being the latest example – affects 
                        both the intelligibility and legitimacy of a policy regardless its potential or real achievements. 
                         
                        3.2.     Incentives 
                        The ENP does not usually offer very strong incentives for neighbouring countries to undergo 
                        painful political and economic reforms which are generally needed in order to engage into 
                        close relationship with the Union. 
                        The prospect of membership – which has proved to be a very powerful incentive – is explicitly 
                        excluded.  This  explains  why  European  neighbours  such  as  Ukraine  have  never  really 
                        accepted the ENP. They merely use it as the tool which is currently available for their strategy 
                        to promote their real objective, which is to join the Union. 
                        The prospects of an advanced economic integration have so far also remained vague (both in 
                        terms of objectives and instruments). To provide a real incentive, the ultimate objective of a 
                        deep substantive economic, and correspondingly political, integration – i.e. the extension of 
                        the Internal Market as operated by the EEA or the bilateral EU-Switzerland agreements – 
                        needs to be more clearly spelled out. This would arguably have to include explicitly aspects 
                        which the Union considers to be “too sensitive”, in particular free movement of persons, and a 
                        more generous use of “hard law” instruments. 
                        This is not to say that the present framework does not already set some incentives, and some 
                        neighbouring  countries  appear  in  fact  to  discover  and  to  progressively  use  the  potential 
                        presently  offered.  However,  in  their  present  shape  they  do  not  provide  an  overly  strong 
                        stimulus for third countries willing to integrate with the Union to accept and implement difficult 
                        compromises and adjustments. Moreover, depending on their current domestic political and 
                        economic structures,  even  the  prospect  of  a  full-blown  economic  and  political  integration 
                        might prove to be plainly unattractive for some of the neighbouring countries. 
                        The flexible nature of the ENP (differentiation) is also problematic in this respect: it appears 
                        not to be the result of any Union policy concept or strategy but the simple consequence of the 
                        fact that the Union‟s offers do not seduce all neighbouring states to the same extent. 
                         
                        3.3.     Conditionality  
                        The  new  Article  8  TEU  imposes  upon  the  Union  the  obligation  to  apply  a  value-based 
                        conditionality when engaging in neighbourhood relationships. As already seen, this condition 
                        can be considered as being satisfied – in particular as cooperation remains at less advanced 
                        stages  –  when  a  neighbouring  country  commits  itself  to  the  Union  values  and  produces 
                        evidence that it also progressively implementing them in practice. 
                        Putting  this  obligation  into  practice  is  indeed  a  demanding  task.  It  raises  a  number  of 
                        questions relating, on the one hand, to the precise criteria to be used at a given stage in the 
                        developing  special  relationship  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  evaluation  method  to  be 
                              12 
           
          applied. This is especially true in respect of the non-European neighbouring states which are 
          not bound by (and cannot adhere to) the European Convention of Human Rights. 
          Conditionality is likely to produce the expected results when it supports an existing domestic 
          policy  process  driving  towards  the  implementation  of  EU  values.  It  is  also  likely  to  work 
          “better” when the Union is able to sustain its support by setting incentives, including those – 
          still suboptimal – incentives offered by the ENP. 
          Should the domestic conditions in a neighbouring state be unfavourable or outright opposed 
          to the acceptance of EU values, the ENP and its limited incentives alone are unlikely to make 
          conditionality “work”. As a result of the introduction of the conditionality condition into the 
          Treaty, the Union would be formally impeded from engaging in advanced cooperation with 
          such  neighbours,  and  would  be  obliged  to  “downgrade”  or  even  suspend  existing 
          relationships as it has been the case of Belarus and Syria. 
          As long as relationships with “problematic” neighbouring countries remain at a low level of 
          intensity, the new explicit Treaty-based obligation to “export” the Union values into its vicinity 
          is unlikely to entail major difficulties. Things are different when cooperation – and be it limited 
          to selected sectors – intensifies and does not directly relate to supporting the development of 
          democracy and the rule of law: even a generous interpretation of the “Union values condition” 
          in  Article  8  TEU  sits  uncomfortably  with enhanced cooperation between the Union and a 
          neighbouring state with a problematic human rights and rule of law record. 
          So far, this problem “only” constituted a credibility gap within the ENP as conceived by the 
          Union  institutions,  of  which  many  (in  the  Union)  took  notice  only  very  recently  as  a 
          consequence of the “Arab Spring”. After the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, the Union 
          needs to decide whether Article 8 TEU will have the effect of “constitutionalising” that gap or 
          whether it will give real substance to the hitherto rather shallow concepts of “shared values” 
          and “joint ownership”. 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
                              13 
           
        
                                        European Legal Studies 
                                    Etudes Européennes Juridiques 
                        
           
                       RESEARCH PAPERS IN LAW 
           
           
          1/2003, Dominik Hanf et Tristan Baumé, “Vers une clarification de la répartition des 
          compétences entre l'Union et ses Etats Membres? Une analyse du projet d'articles 
          du Présidium de la Convention”. 
           
          2/2003,  Dominik  Hanf,  “Der  Prozess  der  europäischen  Integration  in  Belgien. 
          Voraussetzung und Rahmen der Föderalisiserung eines ehemaligen Einheitsstaats”. 
           
          3/2003, Dominik Hanf, “Talking with the “pouvoir constituant” in times of constitutional 
          reform: The European Court of Justice on Private Applicants‟ Access to Justice”. 
           
          4/2003, Horst Dippel, “Conventions in Comparative Constitutional Law”. 
           
          5/2003, Ludwig Krämer, “Access to Environmental Information in an Open European 
          Society - Directive 2003/4”. 
           
          6/2003, Ludwig Krämer, “Uberlegungen zu Ressourceneffizienz und Recycling”. 
           
          7/2003, Ludwig Krämer, “The Genesis of EC Environmental Principles”. 
           
          8/2003, Takis Tridimas, “The European Court of Justice and the Draft Constitution: A 
          Supreme Court for the Union?”. 
           
           
           
          1/2004, Dominik Hanf et Pablo Dengler, “Accords d‟association”. 
           
          2/2004, David Mamane, “Reform der EU-Wettbewerbsregeln für Technologietransfer-
          Verträge: Einfahrt in den sicheren Hafen?”. 
           
          3/2004, Donald Slater and Denis Waelbroeck, “Meeting Competition : Why it is not  
          an Abuse under Article 82”. 
           
          4/2004, Jacques Bourgeois and Tristan Baumé, “Decentralisation of EC Competition 
          Law Enforcement and General Principles of Community Law”. 
           
          5/2004, Rostane Mehdi, “Brèves observations sur la consécration constitutionnelle 
          d‟un droit de retrait volontaire”. 
           
           
           
          1/2005, Jacques Pelkmans, “Subsidiarity between Law and Economics”. 
           
          2/2005, Koen Lenaerts, “The Future Organisation of the European Courts”. 
           
                              14 
           
          3/2005, John A.E. Vervaele, “The Europeanisation of Criminal Law and the Criminal 
          Law Dimension of European Integration”. 
           
          4/2005, Christine Reh and Bruno Scholl, “The Convention on the Future of Europe: 
          Extended Working Group or Constitutional Assembly?” 
           
          5/2005,  John  A.E.  Vervaele,  “European  Criminal  Law  and  General  Principles  of 
          Union Law”. 
           
          6/2005, Dieter Mahncke, “From Structure to Substance: Has the Constitutional Treaty 
          improved the Chances for a Common Foreign and Security Policy?”. 
           
           
           
          1/2006, Dominik Hanf, “Le développement de la citoyenneté de l‟Union européenne”. 
           
          2/2006, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, Thien Uyen Do, “The Case Law of the ECJ concerning 
          the Free Provision of Services : 2000 – 2005”. 
           
          3/2006,  Dominik  Hanf,  “Réformes  institutionnelles  sans  révision  du  traité?”, 
          (document de discussion). 
           
          4/2006, Elise Muir, “Enhancing the effects of EC law on national labour markets, the 
          Mangold case”. 
           
          5/2006, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Why the Open Method of Coordination (OMC) is bad 
          for you: a letter to the EU”. 
           
          6/2006, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “The EU essential facilities doctrine”. 
           
          7/2006, Pablo Ibáñez Colomo, “Saving the Monopsony: Exclusivity, Innovation and 
          Market Power in the Media Sector”. 
           
           
           
          1/2007, Pablo Ibáñez Colomo, “The Italian Merck Case”. 
           
          2/2007, Imelda Maher, “Exploitative Abuses: Which Competition Policy, Which Public 
          Policy?”. 
           
          3/2007, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “With or without you... judging politically in the field of 
          Area of Freedom, Security and Justice?”. 
           
          4/2007, Matteo Pierangelo Negrinotti, “The AstraZeneca Case”. 
           
          5/2007, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Que reste-t-il de la directive sur les services?”. 
           
          6/2007, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Legal Aspects in Establishing the Internal Market for 
          services”. 
           
          7/2007, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Current Problems of Social Europe”. 
           
           
           
                              15 
           
          1/2008,  Vassilis  Hatzopoulos,  “Public  Procurement  and  State  Aid  in  National 
          Healthcare Systems”. 
           
          2/2008, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Casual but Smart: The Court‟s new clothes in the 
          Area of Freedom Security and Justice (AFSJ) after the Lisbon Treaty”. 
           
          3/2008, Takis Tridimas and José A. Gutiérrez-Fons, “EU Law, International Law and 
          Economic Sanctions against Terrorism: The Judiciary in Distress?”. 
           
          4/2008, Ludwig Krämer, “Environmental judgments by the Court of Justice and their 
          duration”. 
           
          5/2008, Donald Slater, Sébastien Thomas and Denis Waelbroeck, “Competition law 
          proceedings before the European Commission and the right to a fair trial: no need for 
          reform?”. 
           
           
          1/2009, Inge Govaere, “The importance of International Developments in the case-
          law of the European Court of Justice: Kadi and the autonomy of the EC legal order”. 
           
          2/2009, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Le principe de reconnaissance muTEUlle dans la libre 
          prestation de services”. 
           
          3/2009,  Dominik  Hanf,  "L'encadrement  constitutionnel  de  l'appartenance  de 
          l'Allemagne  à  l'Union  européenne.  L'apport  de  l‟arrêt  « Lisbonne »  de  la  Cour 
          constitutionnelle fédérale". 
           
           
          1/2010, Vassilis Hatzopoulos, “Liberalising trade in services: creating new migration 
          opportunities?” 
           
          2/2010,  Vassilis  Hatzopoulos  &  Hélène  Stergiou,  “Public  Procurement  Law  and 
          Health care: From Theory to Practice”  
           
          3/2010, Dominik Hanf, “Vers une précision de la Europarechtsfreundlichkeit de la Loi 
          fondamentale  -  L‟apport  de  l‟arrêt  « rétention  des  données »  et  de  la  décision 
          « Honeywell » du BVerfG” 
           
          1/2011, Nicoleta Tuominen, “Patenting Strategies of the EU Pharmaceutical Industry 
          – Crossroad between Patent Law and Competition Policy” 
           
          2/2011, Dominik Hanf, “The ENP in the light of the new “neighbourhood clause” 
          (Article 8 TEU)” 
           
