           hTe North Atlantic Treaty (1949)
           Washington D.C. - 4 April 1949
           The Parties to this Treaty reafﬁrm their faith in the purposes and principles of the 
           Charter of the United Nations and their desire to live in peace with all peoples and all 
           governments.
           They are determined to safeguard the freedom, common heritage and civilisation of 
           their peoples, founded on the principles of democracy, individual liberty and the rule of 
           law. They seek to promote stability and well-being in the North Atlantic area.
           They are resolved to unite their efforts for collective defence and for the preservation 
           of peace and security. They therefore agree to this North Atlantic Treaty:
           Article 1
           The Parties undertake, as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, to settle any 
           international dispute in which they may be involved by peaceful means in such a manner 
           that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, and to refrain in their 
           international relations from the threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with the 
           purposes of the United Nations.
           Article 2
           The Parties will contribute toward the further development of peaceful and friendly 
           international relations by strengthening their free institutions, by bringing about a better 
           understanding of the principles upon which these institutions are founded, and by promoting 
           conditions of stability and well-being. They will seek to eliminate conﬂict in their international 
           economic policies and will encourage economic collaboration between any or all of them.
           Article 3
           In order more effectively to achieve the objectives of this Treaty, the Parties, separately and 
           jointly, by means of continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, will maintain and 
           develop their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack.
           Article 4
           The Parties will consult together whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial 
           integrity, political independence or security of any of the Parties is threatened.
           Article 5
           The Parties agree that an armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North 
           America shall be considered an attack against them all and consequently they agree that, if 
           such an armed attack occurs, each of them, in exercise of the right of individual or collective 
           self-defence recognised by Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, will assist the 
           Party or Parties so attacked by taking forthwith, individually and in concert with the other 
           Parties, such action as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force, to restore and 
           maintain the security of the North Atlantic area.
           Any such armed attack and all measures taken as a result thereof shall immediately be 
           reported to the Security Council. Such measures shall be terminated when the Security 
           Council has taken the measures necessary to restore and maintain international peace  
           and security.
