   Two-Invoice Policy:
   A Paradigm Shift in China’s
   Medical Devices Industry
                                               The two-invoice policy and its impact 
                                               on China’s medical devices industry
                                              Since April 2016, provincial governments have begun to release implementation policies and guidance 
                                              documents in response to the two-invoice requirement promulgated by the central government. With 
                                              the rollout of the two-invoice policy, besides the tax consideration, the government aims to consolidate 
                                              the fragmented distributor market for pharmaceuticals and medical devices with the goal of increasing 
                                              overall distribution chain transparency, developing an environment in which distributors’ markups and 
                                              potential fraudulent behaviors can be better controlled, and making it easier eventually to lower the 
                                              overall prices that patients have to pay for medical devices. 
                                              | Following the policy roll-out for pharma, one can expect this will 
                                                 pose similar impacts on MedTech stakeholders
                                              Figure 1. China’s Two-Invoice Roll-out Timeline for the Pharma Industry
                                              April 2016                                                               August 2017
                                              Before the policy launch, Fujian was the only                            By August 2017, nineteen provinces, 
                                              province that had fully implemented the                                  including Shaanxi, Ningxia, Qinghai, 
                                              two-invoice policy. No other province had                                Sichuan, Hunan, Anhui, Fujian, Guizhou and 
                                              published an agenda to follow.                                           Hainan, as well as Chongqing, had released 
                                                         Implementation detail released                                implementation details with timelines and 
                                                                                                                       nine others had published general guidelines.
                                                         General guidelines released
                                                         No progress
                                              | A gradual roll-out that is expected to pick up pace
                                              If we take hints from the roll-out of the two-invoice policy in the pharmaceutical industry, it is likely that 
                                              the nationwide implementation for medical devices will also follow a “pilot and replicate” model, meaning 
                                              initial roll-outs will start with a few provinces and key cities in those provinces and then be quickly  
                                              replicated by other provinces. We feel that the implementation time-frf ame will be longer than that o
                                              the pharmaceutical industry due to the sheer number of different products that are classiifed as medical 
                                              devices and the fact that the distribution models for products are much more complicated. We expect the 
                                              initial roll-out to start with high-value consumables, followed by in vitro diagnostic devices (IVD) and then 
                                              low-value consumables.
                                              2    |  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                           | The road ahead for medical devices players
                           The implementation of the two-invoice policy will entail signiifcant impacts on medical device players 
                           compared with pharmaceutical players due to the higher margin proifle for the different value-added 
                           service roles that distributors play.
                           For manufacturers, the two-invoice policy means that they will only be allowed to utilize one layer of 
                           distributors to deliver to hospitals (one invoice from the manufacturer to the distributor and a second 
                           invoice from the distributor to the hospital) as opposed to the current multilayer model. The limitation 
                           for utilizing multiple layers of distributors may mean risks in terms of loss of account and geographic 
                           regional coverage, which in turn could mean signiifcant top-line risks for manufacturers that are 
                           ill-prepared for the changes. The reshuflfing caused by the policy rollout will mean the cooperative 
                           models with the current tier 1 and tier 2 distributors will drastically change; some of the distributors 
                           may have to be converted to contract sales organizations (CSO), which means renegotiating 
                           cooperative and partnership details including the allocation of promotional expenses, roles and 
                           responsibilities, ownership of goods, etc. All of these factors point towards signiifcant challenges in 
                           terms of operational and compliance risks that manufacturers need to be aware of and prepared for.
                           On the other hand, a slew of challenges lie ahead for medical device distributors as well. We foresee 
                           a signiifcant trend towards market consolidation, with larger leading distributors looking to acquire 
                           strong regional players to build up their account and regional coverage. This will mean signiifcant 
                           disruption in the market, which will go through a phase of restructuring and renegotiations with 
                           manufacturers. Smaller distributors that do not have strong regional coverage need to quickly 
                           transform themselves or be squeezed out of the market by the consolidating competition. 
                           Separately, we also foresee new competitors in the form of pharmaceutical distributors, like 
                           Sinopharm, quickly entering the device distribution market. These massive pharmaceutical distribution 
                           players have built up strong hospital account coverage and can quickly adapt their models for devices 
                           as well. All in all, a reshuflfing and restructuring of the medical device distribution market is imminent 
                           to comply with the new regulatory environment, and we foresee drastic changes in the form of market 
                           consolidation, reorganization of distributors and overall changes in the collaboration models between 
                           manufacturers and distributors. 
                           | The two-invoice policy will compress the distribution value chain 
                            into one single layer
                           Figure 2. The Two-Invoice Policy’s Impact on the Distribution Value Chain
                                  Before the Two-Invoice Policy              After the Two-Invoice Policy
                                      Manufacturers                             Manufacturers
                           Sales Agents/CSO (can be multiple tiers)
                           •  Control local channels
                           •  Maintain relationships with doctors and 
                             hospitals
                                                                     Single Layer of Distributors
                                                                     •  Tend to be larger distributors with extensive 
                                       Distributors                    networks and diversified product offerings
                                       Distributors
                                         Hospitals                                Hospitals
                                 Money flow
                                 Goods flow
|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry3|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                 Current medical devices distribution model
                 and potential options in the future
                 The medical device industry currently can be broken down into four different segments, including: low-value consumables 
                 (needles, syringes, etc.), high-value consumables (cardiovascular and orthopedic implants, etc.), in-vitro diagnostics                   
                 (diagnostic equipment and reagents), and large medical equipment (imaging equipment, etc.) Each of the four categories 
                 has a unique business model, and therefore unique characteristics in its respective distribution channels. Consumables and 
                 reagents distribution channels mainly rely on various levels of distributors (tier 1 and tier 2, and some products may need 
                 to be distributed to county-level hospitals in rural areas and need even lower-tier distributors) who control the last-mile 
                 connection to the hospitals and are currently highly fragmented and widely dispersed across the nation.
                 | Medical devices can be segmented into four major categories 
                   requiring different distributors
                   Product segments            Business model                  Distributor                      Channel                     Required core 
                                                                               landscape                  development trends              competencies for 
                                                                                                                                             distributors
                     Low-Value             • Wide geographic and          • Rely heavily on             • Channels will continue       • Wide geographic and 
                   Consumables               account coverage               tier 1 to tier 3              to expand to reach             account coverage 
                                                                            distributors                  more lower-tier cities         and efifcient delivery 
                                                                          • Highly fragmented           • Cross-regional                 network
                                                                            market                        distribution platform        • Strong connection 
                                                                                                          being developed                with hospitals and 
                                                                                                                                         ability to control 
                                                                                                                                         costs
                 Low-Value Consumables: Due to the low differentiation between competing products and brands, it is important to 
                 continue increasing the number of distributors and expanding coverage area to ensure continued growth. Regional and 
                 hospital coverage, efifcient distribution network, and control of hospital accounts are distributors’ core competencies 
                 and key differentiators. There is an emerging trend to develop a new cross-regional distribution platform driven by 
                 medical device manufacturers’ needs which will begin to eat into traditional distributors’ market share. At the same time, 
                 manufacturers are continuing to expand their geographic coverage and extend their distributor channels to lower-tier cities.
                     High-Value            • Differentiated product       • Rely heavily on tier 1      • Increasing demand for        • Strong working 
                   Consumables               delivery services and          to tier 3 distributors        higher working capital         capital to handle 
                                             professional clinical        • Highly fragmented           • Centralized distribution       inventory
                                             services                       market                        platform increasingly in     • Professional 
                                                                                                          demand                         capabilities to 
                                                                                                                                         provide clinical 
                                                                                                                                         services
                 High-Value Consumables: Distributors in this category often need to provide follow-up services for surgical equipment 
                 and be on standby for just-in-time delivery services. Due to inventory requirements, distributors will need to have ample 
                 working capital and be able to provide professional clinical services as well. The need for a central distribution and delivery 
                 platform is mainly driven by the growing need for a stronger working capital base mainly due to growth from orthopedics 
                 and cardiovascular treatment areas; but as of now, the competency and capabilities of the platform service providers are still 
                 lacking.
                                          4   |  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                 Product segments          Business model               Distributor                   Channel                  Required core 
                                                                        landscape               development trends           competencies for 
                                                                                                                                distributors
                     In-Vitro          • Place equipment in        • Rely heavily on tier 1    • No drastic changes        • Strong connection 
                   Diagnostics           hospitals for free and      to tier 3 distributors     foreseen in the short        with hospitals
                                         earn higher margins       • Highly fragmented          term                       • Ability to service 
                                         with reagents               market                                                  diagnostics 
                                                                                                                             departments
                                                                                                                           • Cold chain 
                                                                                                                             capabilities
                In-Vitro Diagnostics: Large distributors in general acquire equipment from manufacturers at low cost and place the 
                equipment in hospitals’ diagnostics arms to drive usage and therefore sales of high-margin testing reagents. Manufacturers 
                look for distributors to have hospital connection capabilities, after-sales support capabilities (equipment maintenance and 
                repair, software training, reagent distribution) and cold chain storage and transportation capabilities. The distribution market 
                for IVD products is predicted to remain relatively stable in the near future.
                  Large-Scale          • Equipment leasing         • Rely heavily on tier 1    • Expand business           • Strong working 
                   Equipment                                         distributors               into equipment               capital
                                                                                                maintenance and            • Strong connection 
                                                                                                repair for higher            with hospitals
                                                                                                margins                    • Maintenance and 
                                                                                                                             repair capabilities
                Large-Scale Equipment: A direct sales model for high margin products is adopted for selected key account areas, 
                complemented by a distributor model (usually 1 layer, at most 2) in areas where the manufacturers have limited resources 
                to approach or serve clients directly. Distributors often have to help smaller clients on leasing plans to lower their ifnancial 
                barriers. Some large distributors have been trying to build up their maintenance and repair capabilities in recent years to 
                expand and deepen their connections with hospitals, attract manufacturers without local after-sales service capabilities, and 
                improve their proiftability. The large-scale equipment segment may not be signiifcantly impacted by the two-invoice policy in 
                near future and the distribution model is predicted to remain relatively stable as well.
                | Transformation journey for manufacturers and distributors under the new 
                  policy
                Under the two-invoice policy, consumable and reagent manufacturers will inevitably go through business model 
                transformations. The necessary changes are far reaching and will not only impact distribution channels, but also 
                entail signiifcant changes in the distributor selection process, pricing, tax and ifnancial and compliance areas as well. 
                Manufacturers and distributors need to be able to take a step back and have a holistic understanding of the market dynamics 
                and adjust their strategies accordingly.
                For distributors and wholesalers, tier 1 players and larger regional wholesalers will continue to expand their channel 
                networks to cover more hospitals. For tier 2 and below distributors, there are many potential transformative paths including: 
                elevating to become tier 1 distributors, being acquired by tier 1 distributors, and adjusting their business model to become 
                contract sales organizations or logistics providers.
                In the transformation process, manufacturers must develop new relationships with the shuflfing pool of distributors and 
                seek to partner with the most appropriate players based on product characteristics, target market and account locations, 
                cost model and other pertinent considerations. On the other hand, distributors need to plan strategically based on their 
                capabilities and core competencies and renegotiate with manufacturers regarding their new roles and responsibilities. Due 
                to the changing market dynamics, this transformative process will mean a signiifcant reshuflfing in the relationships and 
                dynamics between manufacturers and distributors.
|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry5|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                                                   | Manufacturer’s transformation
                                                   Distribution model: During the design and implementation of the new distribution models under the 
                                                   two-invoice policy, manufacturers need to consider internal capabilities along with their short-, medium- 
                                                   and long-term needs. We believe there are many potential operating models that can work under the 
                                                   policy and have chosen a few representative models for reference.
                                                   Short-term “quick wins” with minimal operational impact:
                                                   1.  Renegotiate with distributors and turn them into contract sales service providers: Distributors 
                                                        will no longer rely solely on product sales margin as the key source of income but many may need to 
                                                        become service providers and charge servicing fees instead. This model will be the fastest in terms 
                                                        of transformative timeline with minimal impact on the overall distribution channel, but may have to 
                                                        address the risks on margins and pricing, overall ifnance operations and potential compliance.
                                                   2.  Utilizing fr    ee trade zone (FTZ) or offshore transfer of goods: This model requires the manufacturer 
                                                        and ifrst-tier distributor to have entities either in one of China’s free trade zones or offshore locations 
                                                        (Hong Kong for example). The products can be sold between the two entities in the FTZ or offshore, 
                                                        thereby eliminating the invoice required if the transaction was peformed onshore in China. The tier 1 
                                                        distributors can then sell to a second-tier distributor within China. This model would have a minimal 
                                                        impact on the channel but would have other hurdles to overcome including  ifguring out a way to 
                                                        book offshore international revenues, transfer pricing for the distributors, and the related tax and 
                                                        compliance risks.
                                                   Figure 3. Potential Business Models Catering to Short-term Needs                                                                                            Large scale 
                                                                                                                                                     Pros and cons for manufacturers                            equipment
                                                            Lower-tier                 Manuf.             Tier 1 distr.            Hospital          Pros
                                                                                                                                                     • Minimal change to the distribution model in 
                                                            distributors                                                                               the short term
                                                            transform                   Service invoice                     CSO                      Cons
                                                            into CSO                                                                                 • Limited number of potential distributor 
                                                       erm                                                                                             partners that have high bargaining power
                                                       t t                                                                                           • Potential ifnancial and compliance risks
                                                       Shor FTZ or Hong                Manuf.             Tier 1 distr.        Tier 2 distr.         Pros
                                                            Kong goods                                                                               • Minimal change to the distribution model 
                                                                                                                                                       in the short term
                                                            transfer                                                                                 Cons
                                                                                          No invoice here                          Hospital          • Increased supply chain complexity 
                                                                                                                                                       requiring more tax planning and a
                                                                                                                                                       holis tic supply chain planning exercise
                                                   Longer-term transformation requiring larger operational changes:
                                                   1.  Acquire or apply a license to self-operate the distribution platform: Companies can acquire or 
                                                        apply the GSP licenses to establish regional distribution platforms and replace the need for a ifrst-
                                                        tier distributor. This model requires strong operational capabilities to establish an in-house team to 
                                                        operate the distribution platform. The company will need to account for the potential compliance 
                                                        risks as well.
                                                   2.  Invest in distributors and sign valuation adjustment mechanism (VAM) agreement: Manufacturers 
                                                        can potentially consider investing in distributors to have better control on hospital accounts and 
                                                        utilize VAMs to guaranty mutual beneifcial relationships. This model will mean a certain amount of 
                                                        ifnancial and compliance risks to bear as well.
                                                   Figure 4. Potential Business Models Catering to Long-term Needs
                                                                                                           Self-owned                                Pros and cons for manufacturers
                                                            Acquire GSP                Manuf.                  RDC               Tier 2 distr.       Pros
                                                            license and                                                                              • Control Regional Distribution Center 
                                                            create a                                                                                   (RDC) and attract distributors
                                                            distributor                                                                              Cons
                                                            platform                      No invoice here                          Hospital          • Investment in building the RDC capability
                                                        erm                                                                                          • Compliance risks
                                                        ong t                                                                                        Pros
                                                        L   Invest in                  Manuf.             Tier 1 distr.        Tier 2 distr.         • Invest in and develop hospital resources
                                                            distributor                                                                              Cons
                                                            and sign                                                                                 • Build up some service capabilities that 
                                                            VAM                                                                                        may take time
                                                                                          No invoice here                          Hospital          • Compliance risks 
                                                   Business model
                                                                   Money lfow                          Goods lfow
                                                   6     |  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                                        Reshuflfing distributor tiering and selection: Through this transformative process, it is inevitable 
                                        that distributors will go through a round of reshuflfing. Manufacturers need to systematically and 
                                        carefully select the right distribution partners and take into consideration the competitive environment 
                                        and existing partnership relationships. We believe there are three types of distributors that can 
                                        potentially become the future sole tier of distribution partners with manufacturers.
                                        1.    Current tier 1 distributors that have a wide coverage and control of point of sales: These 
                                              distributors already have a sizeable coverage area and can potentially expand their geographic 
                                              coverage through acquisitions of lower-tier distribution partners. These distributors can help 
                                              manufacturers quickly expand their account and regional coverage and have strong bargaining 
                                              power for price negotiations. Examples of such companies include Sinopharma, Shanghai Pharma 
                                              and Jointown.
                                        2.    Original tier 2 and tier 3 dis tributors that will be elevated to tier 1: These distributors already 
                                              have strong regional coverage in their respective provinces and cities with strong connections with 
                                              regional hospitals. These players can potentially expand their coverage and working capital and 
                                              renegotiate with manufacturers to become tier 1 distributors. These players may be quite willing 
                                              to partner with manufacturers due to the potential increase in margins through a transformation.
                                        3.    Hospital-appointed distributors: Original tier 2 and tier 3 distributors who own operational rights 
                                              through public-private partnerships with hospitals to hospitals and hospital groups. These players 
                                              often bear inventory on behalf of the hospitals and have strong relationships with these selected 
                                              hospitals.
Large scale 
equipment                               Pricing, tax and ifnancial impact: The new business models will entail a reshuflfing of the roles and 
                                        responsibilities between manufacturers and distributors. Manufacturers need to reevaluate their cost 
                                        and proiftability models and develop new operating models that are aligned with their strategies and 
                                        goals. The tax and ifnancial operational impact will need to be considered as well.
                                        | It is important to prepare for tax/finance concerns related to 
                                          pricing change due to business model change
                                        Figure 5. Pricing Change Due to Business Model Change, Hip Replacement Implant as an 
                                        Example
                                                         Manufacturers           RMB            Distributors            RMB               Hospital 
                                                                               1070/pc                                2500/pc
                                                                                                Sales: ~34%
                                         Before                                                Service: ~17%                                100%
                                                                                                Invoice: ~6%
                                                              ~43%
                                                                                  Pricing increased by ~80%;  how to 
                                                                                  handle the ifnance and tax impact? 
                                                         Manufacturers           RMB            Distributors            RMB               Hospital 
                                                                               1925/pc                                2500/pc
                                                            Manufacturers cover sales           Sales: ~34%
                                                            (self-own or outsourced to         Service: ~17%
                                          After             a sales agency)                     Invoice: ~6%
                                                                                                                                            100%
                                                           Sales: ~34%
                                                              ~43%
|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry7|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                             | Investment opportunities under the two-invoice policy
                             Under the two-invoice policy, we foresee two trends that will drive a paradigm shift in the medical 
                             devices market and will also create potential investment opportunities:
                             Vertical integration
                             The restrictions that the two-invoice policy places on manufacturers, and the multitiered distributor 
                             system means that many of the manufacturers who have capital and operational capabilities may start 
                             exploring opportunities for vertical integration or acquisition of distributors to build their own in-house 
                             distribution network to eliminate the many layers of distributors the devices have to pass through and 
                             the corresponding invoices between the intermediaries.  
                               Case Study 1:  MedicalSystem Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (MBC) is an in vitro diagnostics 
                               manufacturer based in Eastern China and is publically listed on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. In 
                               2015, MBC started its plan to vertically integrate and acquire key regional distribution partners 
                               to secure its distribution channel to important hospital accounts. Between 2015-2016, the 
                               company made multiple acquisitions of distributors across eight different provinces, successfully 
                               expanding its geographic coverage. The company enjoyed a stellar year, growing at 55% year on 
                               year from 2015-2016, which was a much faster pace than previous years.
                             | MedicalSystem’s vertical integration efforts expanded its 
                              market presence and helped it achieve stellar growth
                             Figure 6. Medicalsystem’s Vertical Integration History
                              MedicalSystem expanded its footprint in the entire value chain through vertical M&A.
                                      Revenue (¥)
                                      193M              Stage 1: Manufacturer
                                                        MedicalSystem was originally an IVD equipment and reagent manufacturer 
                                      683M              Stage 2: Manufacturer + Distributor
                                                        From 2015 to 2016, MedicalSystem acquired many local distributors
                                                                                     The acquired distributors are 
                                                    ation                            located in Xinjiang, Chongqing, 
                                                                                     Zhejiang, Inter Mongolia, 
                                                    egr                              Shanghai, Shandong, Anhui 
                                                    t                                and Jiangsu 
                                                    al In
                                                    tic
                                                    er
                                                    V
                                   1,055M               Stage 3: Manufacturer + Distributor + Clinical Service Provider
                                                        MedicalSystem leverages its local distributors’ relationships with hospitals 
                                                        to co-invest in independent clinical labs
                              MedicalSystem quintupled its income in 5 years
                             8  |  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                                                Horizontal integration
                                                Medical device distributors that have scale and good geographic coverage across different regions may 
                                                begin exploring acquiring other distributors to expand their geographic and hospital account coverage. 
                                                Existing ifrst-tier distributors may acquire other distributors to solidify their positions and have more 
                                                bargaining power when negotiating with manufacturers, while smaller or lower-tier distributors may 
                                                want to acquire other players to expand coverage and scale up to become future ifrst-tier distributors.
                                                   Case Study 2: Yestar Healthcare Holdings Co. Ltd. (Yestar) was a relatively small regional 
                                                   distributor of medical equipment based in the Shanghai area. Starting in 2013, Yestar began 
                                                   large-scale acquisitions of South China-based distributors of IVD products, including Guangzhou 
                                                   Hong En, Shenzhen De Run Li, and Guangzhou Sheng Shi Yuan, signiifcantly expanding Yestar’s 
                                                   geographic coverage of the market. The horizontal integration helped Yestar quintuple its revenues 
                                                   from RMB 474m in 2013 to RMB 2,317m in 2016. Yestar is now the largest China distributor 
                                                   of Roche Diagnostics, the market’s largest IVD device manufacturer, and is quickly expanding its 
                                                   portfolio to cover medical imaging devices as well.
                                                | Yestar expanded its IVD consumable distribution business in 
                                                  East and South China by acquiring local distributors
                                               Yestar expanded its distribution network through horizontal M&A.
                                                Before entering the IVD consumable distribution market, Yestar’s medical business was focused on 
                                                medical radiology iflm manufacturing and distribution in China.
                                               Figure 7. Horizontal M&A History of Yestar’s Distribution Business
                                                   From 2013 to 2017, Yestar entered the IVD consumable distribution market in East and 
                                                   South China through horizontal M&A
                                                             Revenue (¥)
                                                             474M                    Step 1: Enter East-China Market
                                                                                     August 2013: Acquired East China based 
                                                                                     distributor Jiangsu Uno (one of the biggest 
                                                                                     distributors of Roche Diagnostic and BD in 
                                                                                     Anhui and Jiangsu Provinces
                                                                                ation
                                                                                egr  Step 2: Enter Shanghai Market
                                                             721M               t
                                                                                al          InApril 2015: Acquired Shanghai based 
                                                                                t    distributor Anbaida Group (the biggest 
                                                                                on   distributor of Roche Diagnostic in 
                                                                                HorizShanghai)
                                                        2,317M                       Step 3: Enter South-China Market
                                                                                     2016-2017:    Acquired South China based 
                                                                                     distributors Guangzhou Hong En, Shenzhen 
                                                                                     De Run Li and Guangzhou Sheng Shi Yuan
                                                   Yestar has become one of the biggest distributors of Roche Diagnostic in China
|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry9|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                                            Closing 
                                            The roll-out of the two-invoice policy will undoubtedly impact 
                                            the health care and medical devices landscape signiifcantly 
                                            in the next few years. Device manufacturers and distributors 
                                            will inevitably go through drastic transformations to 
                                            adapt to the coming changes. The following are our 
                                            recommendations for each of the players in the value chain.
                                            Manufacturers:  Players should think more strategically and 
                                            upgrade business models to restructure their distribution 
                                            model, look for appropriate partners in distribution 
                                            channels, renegotiate appropriate pricing, and ultimately 
                                            work towards improving overall operational efifciency and 
                                            business performance. It may be wise to select one or two 
                                            provinces as pilot sites to test new operating models and 
                                            make adjustments and replicate workable business models 
                                            to other regions.
                                            Distributors:  The two-invoice policy is an opportunity for 
                                            leading and capable players to stand out in the market. 
                                            Players should leverage existing capabilities and resources 
                                            and expand coverage in terms of accounts and geographic 
                                            regions. They should also reach out to manufacturers 
                                            and renegotiate and/or transform into a contract sales 
                                            organization or logistics partner to gain market share in 
                                            selected market segments.
                                            Investors: Potential vertical and horizontal integration will 
                                            lead to a large-scale consolidation. Signiifcant investment 
                                            opportunities will continuously appear during this process. 
                                            Investors should focus on leading manufacturers and 
                                            distributors that have the potential to become industry 
                                            leaders with strong capabilities and coverage of hospital 
                                            accounts. 
                    10 |  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
                 Contact
                               Andrew Chen 
                               Partner, Growth and M&A Advisory
                               +86 21 2228 3939
                               andrew.chen@parthenon.ey.com
                               Shanghai
                               Su Hua 
                               Partner, Growth and M&A Advisory
                               +86 21 2228 5818
                               hua.su@cn.ey.com
                               Shanghai
                  EY | Assurance | Tax | Transactions | Advisory
                  About EY  
                  EY is a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction and 
                  advisory services. The insights and quality services we deliver 
                  help build trust and confidence in the capital markets and in 
                  economies the world over. We develop outstanding leaders 
                  who team to deliver on our promises to all of our stakeholders. 
                  In so doing, we play a critical role in building a better working 
                  world for our people, for our clients and for our communities.
                  EY refers to the global organization, and may refer to one or 
                  more, of the member firms of Ernst & Young Global Limited, 
                  each of which is a separate legal entity. Ernst & Young Global 
                  Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, does not 
                  provide services to clients. For more information about our 
                  organization, please visit ey.com.
                   
                  © 2017 Ernst & Young, China       
                  All Rights Reserved.
                  APAC no.03004612  
                  ED None.
                  This material has been prepared for general informational purposes only and is 
                  not intended to be relied upon as accounting, tax or other professional advice. 
                  Please refer to your advisors for specific advice.
                  ey.com/china
                  Follow us on WeChat
                  Scan the QR code and stay
                  up to date with the latest EY news.
|  Two-Invoice Policy: A Paradigm Shift in China’s Medical Devices Industry
