           
           
                                               Invoice Instructions 
          NRG’s Suppliers are a critical link in our vision to build a more sustainable future. We are committed to 
          paying our Suppliers accurately and on time, so we use scanners and optical character recognition to read 
          invoices. Invoices from Suppliers that follow these instructions can be scanned, processed, and paid more 
          efficiently. 
                   Invoice Content Requirements 
                                                  Suppliers must prepare invoices containing the following information 
                                                  taken from Buyer’s Purchase Order: 
                                                           Purchase Order number (Contact your NRG point of contact 
                                                            if you have questions about the purchase order that you should 
                                                            use on your invoices) 
                                                           PO line item number 
                      Purchase Order                       PO part number (if applicable) 
                           Invoices                        Description of the product or service exactly as it appears on 
                                                            the NRG PO 
                                                           Unit of measure 
                                                           Unit price 
                                                           Item quantity 
                                                           Total invoice value 
                                                   
                                                  Suppliers submitting invoices for goods or services that fall into one of 
                                                  the exempted categories may invoice NRG without a valid NRG PO 
                       Non-Purchase               number. 
                      Order Invoices                       For non-PO invoices, Supplier must include the name and 
                                                            email address for the NRG employee requesting the product 
                                                            or service (e.g. John Smith, john.smith@nrg.com) 
                                                   
                                                           Suppliers shall prepare a separate invoice for each shipment or 
                                                            service order. 
                                                           The first page of the attachment should be the first page of the 
                            General                         invoice. 
                          Invoicing                        Suppliers shall also provide such evidence as the Buyer may 
                          Guidelines                        reasonably require in support of the invoice. 
                                                           No invoice shall be issued prior to completion of services or 
                                                            shipment of products. 
                                                  One and only one of the below methods for sending invoices should be 
                                                  used. 
                                                  Supplier’s invoice shall also include 
                                                           Supplier’s phone number and remit-to address 
                                                           Invoice number 
                         All Invoices                      Date prepared 
                                                           E-mail address where we can contact you if there are issues 
                                                            with the invoice 
                                                   
           
          Rev. 4/2015                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 2 
           
           
           
          Preferred Submittal Method (Email) 
                   Invoices may be emailed to invoices@nrg.com 
                   Invoices are to be attached as PDF files and one PDF is to contain one invoice. Sending invoices in 
                    any other format is not allowed and will not be processed. 
                   Only invoices should be delivered to the invoices@nrg.com email address and any other 
                    information is discarded. 
                   There can be multiple PDF invoices included in one email and each of the PDF files will be 
                    processed as one invoice. One and only one PO per invoice should be used. 
          Alternate Submittal Method (Fax/Mail) 
          The alternate method for invoice submittal is via mail or facsimile. The preferred method (noted above) 
          should be used whenever possible in order to minimize transaction costs for both the Supplier and NRG. If 
          invoices are submitted via mail or facsimile, Suppliers must not send duplicate invoices via email. Do not 
          use multiple methods for submitting the same invoice. 
                   Each invoice must contain all information (Purchase Order Number and corresponding Purchase 
                    Order Line items) as indicated in the General Instructions (noted above). 
                   Suppliers shall only submit invoices to the NRG Accounts Payable, regardless of any approvals 
                    which may be indicated on Purchase Order. NRG Accounts Payable will be responsible for routing 
                    invoice for appropriate internal approvals. 
                   Invoices may be faxed to 225-618-4039. 
                   Invoices may be mailed to 112 Telly St, New Roads, LA  70760. 
          Supplier Invoices not Doing the Above Will be Rejected (or Delayed) 
          NRG wants to pay your firm in accordance with agreed upon terms. We greatly appreciate your 
          cooperation in adhering to these requirements as it will help us to process your invoice faster. Any 
          exception to these rules may result in invoice rejection or delayed payment as well as additional 
          communication and coordination between our companies. The following examples lead to delays: 
                   Sending the same invoice multiple times. 
                   Sending an invoice to an email address other than invoices@nrg.com. 
                   Faxing or mailing an invoice as opposed to emailing the invoice. 
                   Emailing a single PDF file with multiple invoices (the invoices after the first will not be processed). 
                   Emailing a ZIP file invoice or similarly unreadable format. 
                   Not including a PO number or an NRG contact’s email on the invoice; invoices without a PO number 
                    or NRG email address cannot be matched to goods receipts or routed for approval. 
                   Sending documents that aren’t invoices, such as statements, inquiries, and notices, to 
                    invoices@nrg.com 
          Preferred Method of Payment 
          NRG prefers to pay Suppliers electronically via the ACH (Automated Clearing House) payment system. To 
          receive payments via ACH, log into your existing supplier profile at http://apps.adaptone.com/nrg/ and 
          provide your company’s banking instructions and remittance advice email address. 
          We’re Here to Help You 
          For general Accounts Payable questions, contact NRG Accounts Payable at accountspayable@nrg.com or 
          call our Supplier Hotline at 225-618-4030. For specific PO questions, you should contact your NRG Buyer 
          or NRG Field Representative directly. 
           
          Rev. 4/2015                                                                                                                                                Page 2 of 2 
           
