                                              
                                              
            GLOBAL INCOME INEQUALITY BY THE NUMBERS:  IN HISTORY AND NOW 
                                              
                                     --AN OVERVIEW-- 
          
          
          
                                      Branko Milanovic1 
          
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
         JEL classification: D31. 
         Key words: globalization, global inequality, citizenship premium. 
         Number of words: about 8,700. 
         Sector board: social protection. 
                                                          
         1 Branko Milanovic is Lead economist, Development Research Group, Poverty and Inequality Unit (Email: 
         bmilanovic@worldbank.org). The paper was first presented at the Conference on Global Justice held at the Libera 
         Universita Internazionale degli Studi Sociali (LUISS) in Rome on June 6-9, 2012. It is written as part of the KCP-
         funded project “Changeable inequalities: facts, perceptions and policies” TF012968. The interpretations and 
         conclusions of this paper are entirely mine. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and its 
         affiliated organizations, or those of the governments they represent. 
          
             
                    When we think of income inequality, our first reaction is to think of it within the borders of 
            a country. This is quite understandable for a world where the nastateti ison- very important in 
            determining one’s income level, access to a number of benefits, from pensions to free health care, 
            and where by far the dominant way in which political life is organized is at the level of a country. 
            However, in the era of globalization another way to look at inequality between individuals is to go  
            beyond the confines of a nation-state, and to look at inequality between all individuals in the world. 
            Once we do so, many of the things about inequalities in general that we believe or that we think we 
            know change; it is   like going from a two-dimensional flat world to a three-dimensional one.  
                    As the  world becomes more integrated het  global dimension of  inequality likis ely to 
            become increasingly relevant. This is for at least two reasons: because of much greater movement 
            of factors of production across borders, and because of greater influence of other people’s 
            (foreigners’) standard of living and way of life on one’s perceived income position and aspirations. 
            Greater  movement of capital, goods, technology and ideas from one end of the globeto a  nother 
            implies greater connectivity with people who are not one’s compatriots, and greater dependence on 
            other nations for geneiron ofat       one’s  income.   Movements of labor which illu  thstris ate
            interdependence in a most obvious fashion are still less important than movements of capital, but 
            they are increasing. The knowledge of how other people live and how m umchoney they make 
            influences  strongly our perception of  own income and position in the income pyramid. An 
            imaginary community of world citizens is thus gradually built. And once this is done, comparisons 
            of actual incomes and welfare between different members of that imaginary community acquire 
            importance. This is why global inequality, even if not as relevant and importafontr an         average 
            individual as inequality within her political community (nation state) will gain in importance. Once 
            we compare ourselves with people from other parts of the world, we are indeed interested in global 
            income distribution.  Global inequality  begins to matter.  
                     
                                                              2 
             
           1. Three concepts of inequality and how they evolved over the past sixty years 
           When we talk about inequality that transcends national borders, we really often have in mind 
       not one but three different conc—eevptsen when we are not fully aware of it. I am going to 
       articulate  these three concepts.  
           The first concept of  inequality (let’s call it Inequality 1) is focused on inequalitby etween 
       nations of the world. It is an inequalitys tatistic calculated across GDPs or mean incomes obtained 
       from household surveys of all countries in the world, without population-weighting.  
            
                      Figure 1 Three concepts of inequality defined 
                              Concept 1 inequality
                                       Concept 2 inequality
                   Concept 3 (global) inequality
                                                       
        
        
           To show how this is done, considethr e three individuals in the top row oFf igure 1: the 
       height of each person represents the GDP or mean income of his  or her  country. Somebody from a 
       poor country would be represented as a short person, somebody from a middle-income country as a 
       person of medium height, and somebody from a rich country as a very tall person. When we 
       calculate this concept of inequality, we take all countries with their mean incomes –we have some 
                                  3 
        
                                                                                                   2
            150 countries  in the world with such da-  antad calculate the Gini coeffici.en tChina and 
            Luxembourg  have the same importance, because we do not take populasitizones   into account. 
            Every country counts the same, somewhat like in the UN General Assembly.   
                    Consider now the second row of the figure which would help us define Concept 2 inequality 
            or Inequality 2. There, individuals  from poor countries are all equally short as befoarnd te  hose 
            from rich countries all equally tall, but the difference lies in the fact that countries’ population sizes 
            are now taken into account.  We do exactly the same as we did in  Inequality 1, but now China and 
            Luxemburg (or any other country) enter the calculation with their populations. In Figure 1, the poor 
            country is the most populous (5 individua outls  of total of 10 displayheerd et), and the middle-
            income country, the least populous (2 individuals).   Introducing population is very important.  As 
            we shall see in the next section, during the past 25 years, the movements in Concept 1 and Concept 
            2 inequalities were very differen. t Recall, however, that in both cases the calculation takes into 
            account not actual incomes of individuals, but country averages.  
                      Inequality 3 is  the  global inequality, which is the most important concept for those 
            interested in the world as composed  of individuals, not nations. Unlike the first two concepts,th  is 
            one is individual-based: each person, regardless of her country, enters in the calculation with her 
            actual income. In Figure 1, this is represented by the different heights of individuals who belong to 
            the same country. Not all Americans have the average income of the United States, nor do all 
            Chinese have the average income of China. And indeed in Figure 1, the poorest person  is from   the 
            middle-income country, while her compatriot is the second richest (the second tallest) in our group 
            of ten individuals.  
                    But moving from Concept 2 to Concept 3 inequalityi s not easy. The chief difficulty comes 
            from the fact that to calculate the latter we need access to household surveys with data on individual 
                                                             
            2
              Gini coefficient is a statistical measure of inequality  which takes  its  name from the Italian statistician and economist 
            Corrado Gini. The Gini index is the most frequently used measure of inequality, ranging from 0 –w  hen everybody has 
            the same income - to 1, or 100 (expressed as a percentage or an index), when one person gets the entire income of a city 
            (province, nation, world)—whatever is the relevant population over which we calculate inequality.  
                                                             4 
             
             incomes or consumption. They have to be measured usgin the same or similar methodology,  and 
             need to include as many countries of the world as possible. Perhaps at least 120-130 surveys are 
             needed in order to cover more than 90 percent of the world populationa nd account for 95 or more 
             percent of world income.3 Ideally of course we would like to have surveys from all the countries in 
             the world. This is a very hard requirement. There are still quite a few countries, mostly in Africa, 
             where household surveys are not regularly conduct aednd where methodologies change, rather 
             brusquely, from one survey to another, thus rendering comparisons difficult.  
                    Because  the  calculation  of  global  inequality  relies on household s,  wure vecanysnot  
             calculate Inequality 3 with much precision for the period  before the  mid- or late-1980s. There are 
             simply no household surveys available for too many parts of the world. The first available Chinese 
             household surveys are from 1982, the first usablseu rveys from the former SovietUn         ion are from 
             1988, and for many Sub-Saharan African countries, the earliest household surveys date from the 
             mid-1980s. Thus, for the past, we have to rely on much more ten datativta,e where countries’ 
             income distributions are onlya pproximated, using various more or less reliable methodsTh. is is 
                                                                                                        th
             particularly so if we wish to study global inequality in the lo-rnun, cg    overing the 19  century as 
             well—a topic which I will discuss in Section 3 below. 
                    Figure 2 displays the movements of the three types of inequalitiesaf ter the Second World 
             War. The Gini coefficient is on the vertical axis.  Inequality 1 was stable   from 1960 to 1980. This 
             means that there was no systematically faster or slower growth of  poor or rich countries. Neither 
             were poor catching on with the rich, nor were the two groupsg rowing further apart. Divergence 
             started  only  at the beginning of globalization, around 1980, and went on until the turn of the 
             century. These  two decades were very bad as far as  convergence, or catching up by poor countries, 
             is concerned: rich countries grew, on average, faster than poor countries.  However China and India, 
                                                              
             3
              The coverage is always greater for total world income than population because countries that do not have household 
             surveys are generally poor countries whose importance in global output is small.  
                                                                5 
              
      which are the huge success cases of that period and the two most populous countries in the world,  
      do not enter into calculation of Inequality 1 with greater weights than any other country.  
       
                 Figure 2. International and global inequality, 1952-2011: 
                     “The mother of all inequality disputes” 
              75
              .
                                      Concept 3
              65        Concept 2
             t.
             en
             i
             ic
             f
             f
             oe
             i c
             in
             G55           Concept 1
              .
              45
              .
              1950  1960 1970  1980 1990  2000 2010
                               year
                                                    
          Let  us now  considerf urther  Figure 2.  Why is it   called  “the mother of all inequality 
      disputes”? To see what the dispute is about, consider the difference in the movements ofI nequality 
      1 and Inequality 2. While the first, as we just saw, ro sdeuring the globalization era, the second 
      declined, at times even dramatically.  Measured by Inequality 2, the world has certainly become a 
      much better (“more convergent” or more equal) place precisely during the same period. Thus, those 
      who desire to emphasize the unevenness ofob gall ization tend to focus on growing inter-country 
      gaps, not takin ginto account sizes of population, and prIneeqfeur ality 1. Those who, on the 
      contrary, wish to focus on positive aspects of globalization tend to favor Concept 2, and to point to 
      the indubitable successes of China and India. In effect, to grasp intuitively why and how Concept 2 
      inequality declined, we need just to recall that in these calculations, China counts a lot because of 
      its large population size. And China, starting in the 1980s from an extremely low level of income, 
                              6 
       
            has during the past three decades grown very fast, converging on the rich world. Until recently, it 
            was China alone that had been preventing  a rise in global inequality as measured by Concept 2. But 
            now it has “support” from India which is also  registering high rates of growth, and  is also starting 
            from a very low baseline.  High rates of growth of these two countries arthuse   the major factor 
            underlying the downward trend of Inequality 2.   
                   Inequality 3 can be calculated, as mentioned before, only from the mid-1980s because we do 
            not have household surveys going   further back in time.  Figure 2 shows thatI nequality 3 is higher 
            than Inequality 2. This is true by definition because iIn nequality 3 people enter the calculations 
            with their actual incomes, not with country average. s A quick glance at Figure 1 showsth  at the 
            variability of  heights  is greater in th  theird  row than in the second. Averaging-outred  uces 
            measured inequality.  
                   To calculate “true” global inequality or Concept 3 inequalit,y we have to adjust people’s 
            incomes with the  price levels they face and which, of course, differ between countries.  We are 
            interested in real welfare of people and those living in “cheaper” countries will get a boost in their 
            incomes compared to what they make in nominal dollar terms. The currency we use is international 
            (or “PPP” for purchasing power parity) dollar wwhiitchh, i    n prniciple, one can buy the same 
            amount of goods and services in any country of the world. Indeed, if we were not to adjust for the 
            differences in price levels, and were to use nominal dollars, globainel  quality would have been 
            even higher. This is because price levels tend to be lower in poorer countries, and income of people 
            living in poorer countries thus gets a significant “boost” when we use PPP dollars. 
                   Often, a key issue of concern regarding global inequality is not only its level, but its trend: 
            has it been going up or down tdurhe ignglo balization  era? Global inequality is calculated at 
            approximately five-year intervals, from 1988 (the first dot on the left) to 2008 (the dot on the right). 
            If we compare this last dot  with a couple of dots for the earlier years, we see something that may be  
            historically important: perhapsf or the first time since the Industrial Revolution, there may ba e  
                                                            7 
             
                                         4
            decline in global inequality. Between 2002 and 2008, global Gini decreased by 1.4 poie nts. W
            must not rush to conclude  that what we see in the most recent years represents a real or irreversible 
            decline, or a new trend, since we do not know if the decline of global inequality will continue in the 
            next decades. It is so far just a tiny drop, a kink in the tren, bd ut is indeed a hopeful sign. For the 
            first time in almost two hundred years—after  a long period during which global inequality rose and 
            then reached a very high plateau—it may be setting onto a downward path.   
                     The main reason for this break int he previous trend is what also underlies the decrease in 
            Concept 2 inequality: fast growth of relatively poor and very populous countries, most notabl  y
            China and India. Their growth, reflected in the rising real incomes of their populations, has not only 
            curbed the rise in  global  inequality, but  pushed it slightly down. China’s and India’s roles stand in 
            marked contrast to the two other factors that influence global inequality and which have both been 
            clearly pro-inequality. The first is the  divergence of countries’ mean incomes which lasted from 
            around 1980 to 2000; the second were  rising within-national inequalities in many countrie. sThe 
            catching-up of poor and large countries has been the sole factor offsettin thgese upward pressures. 
            But it has been such a strong factor that it has either kept global inequality from rising or, more 
            recently with the acceleration of Indian growth, reduced it.  
                    What can we saya bout the level of global inequality? What does the Gini of about 70, 
            which is the value of global inequali ty(see Figure 2), mean? One way to look at it is to take the 
            whole income of the world and divide it into two halve: sthe richest 8% will take one-half and the 
            other 92% of the population  will take another half. So, it is a 928 w- orld. Applying the same type 
            of division to the US income, the numbers are 78 and 22. Or using Germany, the numbersar  e 71 
            and 29. Another way to look at it is to compare what percentage of world population, ranked from 
            the poorest to the richest, is needed to get to the cumulative one-fifths of global income.  Three-
                                                             
            4
              Our knowledge of the long-run evolution of global inequality is indeed very tentative, as far as its exact levels are 
                                                                     th
            concerned, but very clear as far as broad tendencies since the mid-19  century: the Industrial Revolution, by creating a 
            massive divergence between the rich Western countries and the rest of the world, has pushed global inequality up (see 
            also Section 3 below).   
                                                             8 
             
                                                                                         th
            quarters of  (the poorer) world population are needed to get to the first 1/5 of total income, but 
            only 1.7% of those at the top suffice to  get to the last one-fifth.   
                   Global inequality is much greater than inequality within any individual country. In Figure 3, 
            global Gini of 70 is shown togetwheithr   the  Ginis for several countries. Global inequality is 
            substantially  greater than inequality in Brazil, a country that is often held, despite tenhet r  ec
            improvements under the Lula presidency, as an exemplar of excessive inequality. And it is almost 
            twice as great as inequality in the United States.5 
                        Figure 3. Global Gini coefficient compared to the Ginis of selected countries 
                           .7                                                           World
                                                                                  Brazil
                           .6
                           .5
                          
                           .4                                                          USA
                           .3                                                          Sweden
                           .2
                                 1970            1980            1990            2000           2010
                                                               year
                                                                                                        
                   How confident are we that these nums betrruly  reflect  what is happening  to  inequality 
            among world citizens?  The  global inequality numbers come from calculations done across 
            representative national surveys which monitor incomes or consumption of households. About 120 
            such surveys stand behind each of the six dots shown in Figures 2 and 3. These 120 surveys include 
            actual incomes or consumption levels for about 10 million people in the world. This is about 1.5% 
            of the current  world population, not a negligible numberip, ale, snd iuffn pricientlyi nc
                                                             
            5
              The vertical axis in Figure 3 shows Gini coefficient in its “natural” values, i.e., not in percentages. Thus a Gini of 0.7 
            displayed there is the same as a Gini of 70. For simplicity, we use the second approach throughout the paper.  
                                                             9 
             
             representative for the world as a whole even if  recently there has been an apparent greater 
             reluctance of the rich to participate in nationahousl    ehold surveys. This in turn likely imparta s 
             downward bias to national and perhaps to global inequality estimates.6   
                     Table 1 shows  the coverage of world population bhousy         ehold surveys. The second row 
             from the bottom shows the overall coverage which was in all years but one greater than  90%. This 
             is quite good, but should not make us forget that the countries that are omitted because they do not 
             conduct household surveys are not a random draw from among all countries in the world but are all 
             poor countries such as Afghanistan, Sudan, Congo, Somalia, Eri, treeatc.    This is reflected in 
             substantially lower population and income coverage of Africa. While the population coverage of 
             other continents never falls below 92 percent, African coverage at its peak is 78 perce nt(see Table 
             1). And, in a worrisome development, the number and availability of household surveys in Africa is 
             currently less than five or ten years ago. If we could include all of the omitted countries, obagl l 
             inequality would increase. In other words, what we calculate here, the Gini of about 70, is a lower 
             bound to global inequality, simply because we do not have data from many of the poorest countries. 
             Thus both the decreasing participation of rich individuals in nationasurvel  ys, and the fact that 
             countries that do not have surveys are overwhelmingly poor, bias the global inequality numbers 
             down.  
                                                              
             6
               The effects of non-participation in surveys on measured inequality is by definition difficult to estimate since income of  
             people who refuse to participate is not known. It is only indirectly (e.g., by looking at the geographical distributions of 
             refusals as in Korinek, Mistiaen and Ravallion, 2005) that we can conclude that it is the rich who comply less. The 
             difficulty of figuring out the effects of rich’s non-participation exists despite the intuition that it must underestimate 
             actual inequality. In a model proposed by Angus Deaton (2005), where compliance decreases with income following a 
             Pareto-like function, standard deviation of income  distribution does not change and inequality, by most measures, is 
             unaffected. However, with different non-compliance functions, inequality may indeed be underestimated. 
                                                                10 
              
                   
                   
                      Table 1. Population coverage by household surveys, 1988-2008 (in percent) 
                                                         
                                       1988      1993     1998      2002     2005     2008 
           Africa                        48       76       67        77       78        75 
           Asia                          93       95       94        96       94        98 
           Latin America and the         87       92       93        96       96        95 
           Caribbean 
           Post-communist countries      99       95       100       97       93        92 
           Rich world (Western           92       95       97        99       99        97 
           Europe, North America 
           and Oceania) 
           World                         87       92       92        94       93        94 
                                                                                          
           Number of countries with     103      122       124      122       122      116 
           household surveys 
           Note: Post-communist countries include Eastern European countries (many of which are members of the EU), and 
           former Soviet republics. This is not an ideal classification, and in the future it may have to be changed. 
                                                       11 
            
         
            2. From the fall of the Berlin Wall to the global financial crisis: Who won and who lost 
            It is generally thought that there are two groups who are the big winners of the past two 
        decades of globalization:  first, the very rich, those at the top of national and global income 
        distributions, and second, the middle classes of emerging market economies, in particular China, 
        India, Indonesia and Brazil. Is this true? Figure 4 provides an answer by showing the change in real 
        income (measured in constant international or PPP dollars) between 1988 and 2008 at various 
        percentiles of the global income distribution.  
            What parts of the global income distribution registered the largest gains between 1988 and 
        2008? As the figure shows, it is indeed among the very top of the global income distribution and 
        among the “emerging global middle class”, which includes more than a third of  world population, 
        that we find most significant increases in per capita income. The top 1% has seen its real income 
        rise by more than 60% over those two decades.  The largest increases however were registered 
        around the median: 80% real increase at the median itself and some 70% around it. It is there, 
                 th   th
        between the 50  and 60  percentile of  the global income distribution that we find some 200 million 
        Chinese,  90 million Indians, and about 30 million people each from Indonesia, Brazil and Egypt.  
        These two groups—the global top 1%  and the middle classes of the emerging market economies— 
        are indeed the main winners of globalization. 
            The surprise is that those at the bottom third of the global income distribution have also 
        made significant gains, with real incomes rising between more than 40% and almost 70%. The only 
        exception is the poorest 5% of the population whose real incomes have remained the same. It is this 
        income increase at the bottom of the global pyramid that has allowed the proportion of what the 
        World Bank calls the absolute poor (people whose per capita income is less than 1.25 PPP dollars 
        per day) to go down from 44% to 23% over approximately the same 20 years. 
                                     12 
         
                      Figure 4. Change in real income between 1988 and 2008 at various percentiles of global  
                                   income distribution (calculated in 2005 international dollars) 
                                                                                                              
            Note: The vertical axis shows the percentage change in real income, measured in constant international dollars. The 
            horizontal axis shows the percentile position in the global income distribution. The percentile positions run from 5 to 
                                                                                                    th     th
            95, in increments of five, while the top 5% are divided into two groups: the top 1%, and those between 95   and 99  
            percentiles. 
                     
                     
                    But the biggest losers (other than the very poorest 5%), or at least the “non-winners,” of 
                                                    th       th
            globalization were those between the 75   and 90   percentiles of  the global income distribution 
            whose real income gains were essentially nil. These people, who  may be called a global upper-
            middle class, include many from former Communist countries and Latin America, as well as those 
            citizens of rich countries whose incomes stagnated.   
                    Global income distribution has thus changed in a remarkable way. It was probably the 
            profoundest global  reshuffle of people’s economic positions since the Industrial revolution. 
            Broadly speaking, the bottom third, with the exception of the very poorest, became significantly 
            better-off, and many of the  people there escaped absolute poverty. The middle third or more 
            became much richer, seeing their real incomes rise by approximately 3% per capita annually.  
             
                                                             13 
             
            The most interesting developments, though, happened among the top quartile: the top 1%, 
        and somewhat less so the top 5%, gained significantly, while the next 20%  either gained very little 
        or faced stagnant real incomes. This created polarization among the richest quartile of world 
        population, allowing the top 1% to pull ahead of the other rich and to reaffirm in fact -- and even 
        more so in public perception -- its preponderant role as winners of globalization.  
            Who are the people in the global top 1%? Despite its name, it is a less “exclusive” club than 
        the US top 1 percent: the global top 1% consists of more than 60 million people, the US top 1% of 
        only 3 million. Thus, among the global top percent, we find the richest 12 percent of Americans 
        (more than 30 million people) and between 3 and 6 percent of  the richest Britons, Japanese, 
        Germans, and French. It is a “club” still overwhelmingly composed of the “old rich” world of  
        western Europe, northern America and Japan. The richest 1% of the embattled Euro countries of 
        Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece are all part of the global top 1 percentile. However, the richest 1% 
        of Brazilians, Russians and South Africans belong there, too.  
            To which countries and income groups do the winners and losers belong? Consider the 
        people in the median of their national income distributions in 1988 and 2008. In 1988, a person with 
        a median income in China was richer than only 10% of world population. Twenty years later, a 
        person at that same position within Chinese income distribution, was richer than more than one- 
        half of world  population. Thus, he or she leapfrogged over more than 40% of people in the world. 
        For India, the improvement was more modest, but still remarkable. A person with a median income 
                       th                 th
        went from being at the 10   percentile globally to the 27 . A person at the same income position in 
                        th   th
        Indonesia went from the 25   to 39   global percentile. A person with the median income in Brazil 
                                      th
        gained as well. She went from being around the 40   percentile of  the global income distribution to 
               th
        about the 66  percentile. Meanwhile, the position of large European countries and the United States 
        remained about the same, with median income recipients there in the 80s and 90s of global 
        percentiles. But if the economic crisis that currently affects these countries persists, we should not 
        be surprised to find the median individual in the “rich world” becoming globally somewhat poorer. 
                                     14 
         
            So who lost between 1988 and 2008? Mostly people in Africa, some in Latin America and 
                                                   nd     th
        post-Communist countries. The average Kenyan went down from the 22   to the 12  percentile 
                                 th   th
        globally, the average Nigerian from the 16  to 13  percentile. A different way to see this is to look 
        at how far behind the global median was an average African in 1988 and twenty years later.  
        In 1988, an African with the median income of the continent had an income equal to two-thirds of 
        the global median. In 2008, that proportion had declined to less than one-half. The position of a 
                                                      th
        median-income person in post-Communist countries slid from around the 75  global percentile to 
           rd
        the 73 . The relative declines of Africa, and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union confirm 
        the failure of these two parts of the world to adjust well to globalization, at least up to the early 
        years of the 21st century. Their improved more recent performance is still too fragile to have been 
        reflected in the data. 
            The Lorenz curves, which plot the percentage of cumulative income (running from 1 to 100) 
        on the vertical axis against the percentage of cumulative population (running also from 1 to 100) on 
        the horizontal axis, for 1988 and 2008 intersect in an almost textbook-like fashion (see Figure 5).  
        Neither distribution is Lorenz-dominant. The gains at below and around the median make the 
                                                    th
        Lorenz curve for 2008 lie above the one for 1988 all the way up to the 80  percentile. For example, 
        the bottom two-thirds of  world population received 12.7 percent of world income in 2008 as 
        against 9.3 percent in 1998. But the stagnation or decline in real income of the global upper middle 
        class, and big gains realized by the top 1%, reverse the position of the Lorenz curves for the last 
        one-fifth of the distribution. Here, the top 1% in 2008 receives almost 15 percent of global income 
        vs. 11½ twenty years earlier.  
                                     15 
         
               Figure 5. Lorenz curves for global income distributions in 1988 and 2008 
                                                          
      Note: The Lorenz curve shows on the horizontal axis, the cumulative percentage of population, ranked from the poorest 
      to the richest percentile, and on the vertical axis, the cumulative percentage of total income received by such population 
      percentiles. If, for a given value of x, y is greater, it means that the bottom x percent of population receives a greater 
      share of total income.   
           
          The bottom line is that these results show a remarkable change in the underlying global 
      income distribution. We now live in a world with a bulge around the median with significantly 
      rising incomes for the entire second third (or more) of the global income distribution. That is the 
      new aspiring global middle class. We also see growing wealth and probably power of those at the 
      very top and, remarkably, stagnant incomes for both the people just below the “enchanted” richest 1 
      or 5 percent, and those poorest in the world. 
                              16 
       
              
                    3. Global inequality over the long-run: From proletarians to migrants   
                    I will now look at  global inequality over the long sweep of historIt iy. s here that we can 
             establish an important finding, which goes, I think, into some core issues of political philosophy 
             and economics.  
                    Let us try to do for the entire period since the Industrial Revolution the same type of global 
             inequality calculations which we have just shown for thel ast 20 years. We ask, “what was global 
                                                       th
             inequality  then—say, around the mid-19  century?” It is a question impossible to answer with any 
             precision,  because we do not have household survey sor any other reliable  sources of income data 
             for these time. Ns onetheless, some important    attempts to estimate it have been made before, 
             notably by François Bourguignon and Christian Morrisson (2002), who were the first to take such a 
             long-run view. They used income levels (GDP per capita) from Angus Maddison’s database (2004; 
             2007),  and some of tiher own (necessarily often shaky) estimates of income distributions for 
             different parts of the worl, td o create global income distributions for eleven benchmark years 
             spanning the period 1820-1992.   heTy did the best one could  do with the available data —and  
             their results have been corroborated, to the extent that it is possible to corroborate something as 
             tentative, by several later authors (Van Zanden,  Baten, Foldvari and van Leeuwen 2010; Milanovic, 
             2011). The basic story that emerges from  these calculationsof  income inequality  in  far-away 
             times is that since the Industrial Revolution, which launched a score of European countries and their 
                                                                                                                  th
             overseas off-shoots onto a path of faster growth, globali nequality kept on rising untilth  e mid-20  
             century.  There was  a p erofio md ore than a centur yof  steady increase in  global  inequality, 
                                                                                                                  st
             followed by perhaps fifty years (between the end of the Second World War and the turn of the 21 
             century) when global inequality remained on a high plateau, changin gvery little. We saw this in  
             Figure 2 where the six dots are all within several Gini points of each other, t, whaitthi in ones     -
                                                                                             st
             standard error of the calculated Gini coefficien. tsIt is only in the early 21 century that global 
             inequality might have commenced its downward course. If indeed this happe tnso pass, global 
                                                               17 
              
              inequality would have charted a gigantic inverted U-shaped curve and perhaps in some fifty years—
              if the emerging market economies continue to grow faster than the rich world—we might be back to 
              the state of affairs that existed around the time of the Industrial Revolution. 
                       But, for now, we are still very far from it. And perhaps nothing shows it better than Figure 6. 
              There  the height of theb ar represents the Theil coefficient of global inequality  in two baseline 
                                         7
              years: 1870 and 2000. The height of the bar is much greater  now, meaning that global inequality 
              today is greater than in 1870, which of course is not a surprise. 8 
                                                           Figure 6. A Non-Marxian world: 
                                                                                           th
                            Level and composition of global inequality in the 19  century and around year 2000 
                                                            (measured by the Theil index) 
                                                                               
              Note: I use Theil mean log deviation because it is exactly decomposable (as between “class” and “location”) and               
              because the importance of each component does not depend on the rest of the decomposition. Anand and Segal (2008) 
              in their review of global inequality studies suggest that it is the most appropriate inequality index for this kind of 
              decomposition.   
               
                                                               
              7
                Theil coefficient, named after the Dutch econometrician Henri Theil, is another way to measure inequality. It is not as 
              popular, nor is its meaning as intuitive, as Gini, but in this case, when we have to decompose inequality into two 
              components, Theil coefficient is preferable to Gini whose decomposition is not “exact”. That is, with the Gini there is a 
              residual terms whose interpretation is not always clear.  
               
              8
                The results would have been the same with the Gini. 
                                                                         18 
               
                     What is less obvious and less well known is that thshae res of the two factors determining 
             global inequality have changed in a remarkable fashion. Global inequality can be decomposed into 
             two parts. The first part is due to differences in incomes within nations, which means thatht at part 
             of total inequality is due to income differences between rich and poorA  mericans, rich and poor 
             Chinese, rich and poor  Egyptians and so on for all countries in the world.  f Ione adds up all of 
             these within-national inequalities, one gets their aggregate contribution to global inequality. This is 
             what I call the “class” component to global inequality because it accounts for (the sum) of income 
             inequalities between different “income classes” within countries. The second component, which I 
             call the “location” component,  refers  to the differences between mean incomes of all the countries 
             in the world. So there, one act  ually asks “how much are the gaps in average incomes between 
             England and China, between the Netherlands and India, between the United States and Mexico and 
             so on influencing  global inequality?”  It is the sum of inter-country differences in mean incomes. In 
             technical terms the first part “cl- ass”  –  is  also  called “within inequality”, the second pa–rt 
             “location”- is called “between inequality”. 
                     Figure  6  plots these two parts, class and location, for the years 1870        and 2000.  Around 
             1870, class explained more than 2/3 of global  inequality. And  now?T he proportions have exactly 
             flipped: more  than 2/3 of tota linequality  is due to location. The implication of this overwhelming 
             importance of location, or which is the same, citizenship (i.e., being a member of a rich or po or
             country), for our lifetime incomes can be also very well captured by another exercise. We divide the 
             population of each country into 100 income percentiles, ranked from the lowest to the richest. Now, 
             if we run a regression with income levels of these percentiles (for 120 countries, this gives  12,000 
             observations) as the dependent variable, and on the other side of the regression, use as the only  
             explanatory variable  the mean income of the countryw  here each percentile comes fro,  m we 
             explain  between  more than one-half of variability  in  individual  incomes.  This is a  remarkable 
             achievement for a single explanatory variablDe. ifferently put, more than fifty percnte of one’s 
             income depends on the average  income of the country where a person lives or was born (the two 
                                                                  19 
              
     things being, for 97% of world population, the same). This githeve is mportance of the location 
     element today.  There are of course other factors that  matter for one’s income, from gender and 
     parental education which are, from an individual point of view externally given circumstances, to 
     factors like own education, effort and luck that are not. They all  influence our income level. But the 
     remarkable thing is that a very large chunk  of our income will be determined by only one variable, 
     citizenship, that we, generally, acquire at birtIh. t is almost the same as saying, thaIt if kno w 
     nothing about any given individual in the world, I can, with a reasonably good confidence, predict 
     her income just from the knowledge of  her citizenship.   
        As stated in the title of Figure 6, we live today in a non-Marxian world. Karl Marx could 
     indeed eloquently write in 1867 in “Das Kapital”, or earlier in “The Manifetso”  about proletarians 
     in different parts of the world—peasants in India,  wrsor iken England, France or German—y  
     sharing the same political interests. They were invariably poor and, what is important, they were all 
     about equally poor, ekin gout a barel yabove-subsistence existence, regardless of the countr yin 
     which they lived. There was not much of a difference in their material positionsne c. Oould  
     imagine and promote   proletarian solidarit, yand consequently—because equally poor people of 
     different nations faced equally rich people each in their own nation—a generalized class conflict .
     This was the idea behind Trotsky’s “permanent revolution”. There were no national contradictions, 
     just a worldwide class contradiction.   
        But if the  world’s actual situation is such that the greatest disparities are due to  the income 
     gaps  between nations, then  proletarian solidarity does not  make much sense. Indeed income levels 
     of poor individuals in poor countries are much lower than incom leveels of poor people  in rich 
     countries. Those who are considered nationally poor in the United States or the European Union 
     have incomes which are many times greater than the incomes of the poorpe  ople in poor countries 
     and moreover often greater than the incomes of the middle class in poor countries. And if that gap is 
     so wide, then one  cannot expect any kind of coalition between these income-heterogeneous groups 
     of nationally poor peopl, oer at least not ancyo alition based on the similarit yof their material 
                         20 
      
              positions and near-identity of their economici nterests. Proletarian solidarity is then simply dead 
              because there is no longer  such a thing as the global proletariat. This is  why ours is  adistinctly 
              non-Marxian world. But what kind of the world is it? To this question I turn next.  
                        
                       4. Gaps between country incomes today   
                       In Milanovic (2012), I have argued that a proper analysis of global inequality today requires 
              an empirical and  mental shift  from concerns with class to concerns with location, in other words, a 
              movement “from proletarians to migran”.ts This was  meant to summarize a macro-development  
              that has taken place over the last two centuriesIf t. he main determinant of one’s income  is now 
              location, who are the underdogs? People who live in poor countries. And what do underdogs want 
              to do? They want to become richer at home, or failing that, to migrate to richer places.  
                       Figure 7. Different countries and income classes in global income distribution, 2005 
                                 00
                                 1
                              n  90   United States
                              io
                              ut 80
                              ib
                              r
                              t
                              is 70
                               d
                              e          Russia
                              om 60
                              c                                                  China
                              in 50
                              d 
                              l             Brazil                                                         India
                              or
                               w 40
                              of
                              e 
                              il 30
                              nt
                              e
                              c  20
                              er
                              p
                                 10
                                 1
                                    1                5                    10                    15                   20
                                                                      country ventile
              Note: The line drawn at y=60 shows the global position of the poorest 5% of  the US population.                
               
               
                                                                         21 
               
                    To illustrate the difference in the economic positions of people from different countries, we 
            resort to the same exercise as was sketched above:I  di    vide the populations of a  lclountries into 
            groups of 5% (called ventiles, since there are 20 such groups in a population) running from the 
            poorest to the richest. This is shown on the horizontal a xoisf Figure 7: the poorest ventile in any 
            country will be at x=1.  Consider for example the poorest 5% of people in the United States. I put 
            them all together, and calculate their average income; I then do the same for the next 5%, then for 
            the next 5% --all the way to the very top, richest ventile. The poorest 5% of Americans are making 
            around $3,000-4,000 per capita per year. How do they compare  with the rest of the world? In what 
            percentile of the global income distribution would they be? This is shown on the vertical axis. We 
            can start  with intuition: poor Americans are unlikely to be amotnheg  poorest people globally 
            speaking, because their incomes are not that low. For example, we know that some 20 percent of 
            global population live at less than 1 international dollar per day, while the US poverty line  (below 
            which, in principle, nobody in the United States should fall) is  13 dollars per day. Thus, intuitively 
            and based on such very limited evidence, we can already expect the poorAmeresitcan           s  to be 
            relatively high up in the globainl come distribution. Indeed,  as shown by the graph, the poorest 
                                    th
            Americans are at the 60  percentile of world income distribution. This means that they have higher 
            annual income than 60% of the world population.  As one  moves higher up, obviously each richer 
            ventile of Americans will stand even higher in the world income distribution,  ithw the richest 5% 
            of Americans belonging to the global top 1 percent.  (Witha m    ore detailed and finer partitioning it 
            can be shown that the top 11 percent of Americans are all part of the highest global percentile, as 
            we saw in Section 2.). 
                    How does the same thing look for a country like India? The very top of the income 
            distribution in India overlaps with the very bottom of the income distribution in the Utedni States. 
            Clearly, there are millionaires in India as well as other people who are quite rich, and the same 
            graph with percentiles (rather than  ventiles) would have shown  the top end of India’s income 
                                                                                                               th
            distribution  to be a little bit higher, but even in that case  it would not go  past the globa   l 80
                                                             22 
             
             percentile. So these rich Indian, as  s a group, barely match the average income of  middl-cleass 
             Americans. Note that these are indeed very large groups of peopl eand that the averages may 
             conceal some very high individual incomes: if I use ventiles, each Indian ventile consists of some 
             60 million people, if I use percentile each percentile is 12 million people. The latter figure is equal 
             to the population of the municipality of Mumbai.B  ut the key  point is that although there are in 
             India some very rich, and even some extravagantly rich people, the nirumbers are not statistically 
             significant, and  the number of people who  have the standard of living of  the American middle 
             class is still very limited.  
                    Consider the same graph for China. China dominates India throughout the whole income 
             distribution (people at a given percentile level of Chinese distribution always have higher income 
             than people at that same percentileof   India’s income distribution), and the Chinese top ventile  
                                  th
             attains almost the 80  percentile of  the world’s income distribution. If  we  used percentiles, the top 
             1% of  the Chinese would be better-off than 93% of world population. 
                    Consider now Brazil.N  ot surprisingly, Brazil  mimics the wor. Tld he poorest people in 
             Brazil  are at the bottom of the global income distribution, among the poorest people in the world, 
                                                                                                         th         th
             while its fairly large middle clas se njoys income levels that place it between the 70        and  80  
             percentiles in the world.  At the very top,  the richest Brazilians  are part of the top one or two 
             global percentiles.   
                                                                23 
              
                            Figure 8. Italy and the rest of the world 
                     00
                     1
                    n90 Germany
                    io
                    ut80
                    ib
                    r
                    t
                    is70  Italy
                     d
                    e                      Albania
                    om60
                    c                                 Cote d'Ivoire
                    in50
                    d 
                    l
                    or      Argentina
                     w40
                    of
                    e 
                    il30
                    nt
                    e
                    c20
                    er
                    p
                     10
                     1
                      1       5         10        15        20
                                      country ventile
                                                                
            Figure 8, displayed in the exactly the same fashion as Figure 7, is dedicated to Ital buty   
        could have done for any important migrationr-eceiving country: United States, Germany, France or 
        Spain. In  the Figure, Italy’s  distribution is compared with that of the world, and then with the 
        distributions of the  countries  providing  the bulk of immigrantst oin Italy.  First, where is Italy, 
                                                     th
        compared to the rest of the world? Its poorest people are just below the 60 global percentile; it is, 
        as we just saw ,approximately the same percentile where the poorest Americans are. As we move 
        toward the richer Italian ventiles, their global position (obviously)i mproves, and the richest 5% of 
        Italians are at the top of the world, that is, among the top global percentile.  
            Compare now Italy with a few other countries, Germany for example.  What stands out is 
        the very high income level of the bottom ventiles for Germany. The same would be tru ife instead 
        of  Germany,  we used Denmark, Norway or other Nordic countries. The people at the bottom of the 
                                              th 
        income distributions in those countries are around thepe 80rcentile of the world income 
                                           th
        distribution  or highe.r The poorest Danes are at the 9 0percentile while in the countries like 
                                     24 
         
                                                          th
        Mozambique and Uganda not even the top ventile reaches further than the 65 percentile. The 
        poorest Danes (as a group) are richer than the richest Ugandan (as a group).   
            To zero in on the importance of citizenship and consequently migrat istion, i useful to 
        compare the data  for Italy with those for the countries wher emost of migrants into Italy come 
        from. This is  because the major implication of a world where location matters is that migration can 
        significantly  increase a person’s  income. The way to improve one’s standard of living is simply to 
        move  to a richer country. In Albania, about 30% of the population  have incomes that are below the 
        poverty  threshold in Italy, and obviously these peopl, eeven if they were to become the poorest 
        people in Italy  after migration, would still improve their real income.  The same is true for 
        Argentina: a very high percentage –about a quarter of the population—have  incomes that are below 
        the Italian de facto poverty threshold.  And finally consider the Ivory Coast, as a representative of 
        African countries.  Ther, e  a staggering 80% of the population belivlowe   the Italian poverty 
        threshold.  So if these 80% of Ivoirians were to move to Italy, they would all become better o—ff
        even if they were just to join the poorest Italians. 
             
            5. Concluding remarks: Philosophical reflections and political implications. 
            I want to conclude with two points which I think can be derived from what I discussed so 
        far.  
            The first one is an issue fo rpol  itical philosophy. If most of global inequality is due to 
        differences in location, can we treat locatio, nand thus citizenship, as a ren ot r a premium (or 
        observely, as a penalty)?  Is citizenship—belonging to a given country, most often through birth—
        something that  gives us by itself the right to greater income? Is there a difference in our view of the 
        matter if we take a global, as opposed to national perspective? I s there a contradiction between the 
        two?  
            Within a single country, society tries in principle to limit the advantages acthcrat ue to 
        people born in rich familie. Ts his includes    having  access to better education and health, to 
                                     25 
         
        powerful friends and  private information, and of course to greater wealth.  Society tries to limit 
        these inherited advantages by either taxing wealth or b ymaking education, health etc. available to 
        all, regardless of their income level. But what is the case i n the “global world”? The situation is, at 
        one level, very similar. There are rich countries that have accumulated lots of wealth, and transmit 
        that wealth, along with  many other advantages, to the next generations of their citizens. This is 
        why, for example, the poorest Americans  are relatively well-off by world standards. They are lucky 
        to have been born in the country that is rich (or has becomech r;i  the case was differentw  ith the 
                         th
        poorest Americans in the 17  century).  And there are also people from poor countries who do not 
        have  wealth, and advantages and opportunitie sit confers. But—and this is in stark  difference to 
        the within-country case —this is considered unobjectionable, or rather it is not questionedw hether 
        one  may keep on benefiting from something that the previous generations have created, and she has 
        simply inherited by virtue of birth. In one case, we frown upon the transmission of  famil-yacquired 
        wealth to offsprings if two different individuals belong to the same nation. nI the other case, we 
        take it as normal that there is a transmission of collectively acquired wealth over generations within 
        the same nation, and if two individuals belong to two different nations, we do not even think, much  
        less question, such acquired differences in wealth, income and global social position.  
            Now, in political philosophy, there are good arguments to go on with that approach, as we 
        implicitly do today, and there are also good arguments to disapprove of it. It is hard to decide which 
        way is right. But what we can do is to put that argument on the table, open it for discussion.  
            The second implication of all of this has to do,of  course, with the issue of migration. If   
        citizenship explains 50 percent or more of variability in global incomes, then there are three ways in 
        which  global inequality can be reduced. Global inequality may be reduced by high growth rates of 
        poor countries. This requires an acceleration of income growth of poor countries, and of course  
        continued high rates of growth of India, China, Indonesia, etc.  The second way is to introduce 
        global redistributive schemes although it is very difficult to see  how  that could happen. Currently, 
        development assistance is a little over 100 billion a year. This is  just five  times more than the 
                                     26 
         
        bonus Goldman Sachs paid itself during onecr isis year.  So we are not really talking about very 
        much money that the rich countries are willing to spend to help poor countries. But the willingness 
        to help poor countries is now, with the ongoing economic crisis in the West, probably reaching its 
        nadir. The third way in which global inequality and poverty can be reduced is through migration. 
        Migration  is likely to  become one of the keyem prsobl—or solutions, depending on one’s  
                     st
        viewpoint— of the 21  century. To give just one stark example: if you classify countries, by their 
        GDP per capita level, into four“wo  rlds”, going from the rich world of advanced nations, with 
        GDPs per capita of over $20,000 per year, to the poorest, fourth, world with incomes under $1,000 
        per year, there are 7 points in the world where  rich and poor  countries are geographically closest to 
        each other, whether it is because they share a border, or because  the sea distance between them is 
        minimal.  You would not be surprised to find out that atll hese 7 points have mines, boat patrol, s
        walls and fences to prevent free movement of people. The rich world is fencing itself in, or fencing 
        others out. But  the  pressures of migration arre emaining strong, despite the current crisis, simply 
        because the differences in income levels are so huge.  
            I conclude with something that resembles as l ogan: either poor countries will become 
        richer, or poor people will move to rich countries. Actually, these two developments can be seen as 
        equivalent.  Development is about people: either poor people have ways to b ecome richer where 
        they are now, or they can become rich by moving somewhere else.  Looked from above, there is no 
        real difference between the two options . From the point of view of real politics, there is a whole 
        world of difference though.   
                                     27 
         
       
      REFERENCES: 
       
      Anand, Sudhir and Paul Segal, “What Do We Know about Global Income Inequality?, Journal of 
      Economic Literature, No. 1, 2008, p. 85. 
      Bourguignon, François and Christian Morrisson (2002), “The size distribution of income among 
      world citizens, 1820-1990”, American Economic Review, September, pp. 727-744. 
      Deaton, Angus (2005)  “Measuring poverty in a growing world”, Review of Economics and 
      Statistics,  vol. 87, No. 1, pp. 1-19.  
       
      Korinek, Anton, Johan A. Mistiaen, and Martin Ravallion (2005), “Survey Nonresponse and the 
      Distribution of Income”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3543, March.   
       
      Maddison, Angus (2004), “World population, GDP and GDP per capita, 1-2000 AD”. Available at 
      http://www.eco.rug.nl/~Maddison/.  
       
      Maddison, Angus (2007), Contours of the world economy, 1-2030: Essays in macro-economic 
      history, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
       
      Milanovic, Branko (2011), “Global inequality and the global inequality extraction ratio: the story of 
      the past two centuries", Explorations in Economic History,  vol. 48,  November,  pp. 494-5 06. 
       
      Milanovic, Branko (2012), “Evolution of global inequality: from class to location, from proletarians 
      to migrants”, Global Policy, vol. 3, No. 2, May .   
       
      Van Zanden, Jan Luiten, Joerg Baten, Peter Foldvari and Bas van Leeuwen (2010), “The Changing 
      Shape of Global Inequality, 1820-2000”, typescript, December 2010.  
       
       
       
       
                           28 
       
