                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                How to Convert 
                                                               your Paper into a 
                                                                   Presentation 
                   
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                                                     
                  During your college career, you may be asked to present your academic work in the classroom, at 
                  conferences, or at special events. Two types of talks are common in academia:  presentations in the 
                  classroom (including Honors Thesis presentations) and conference presentations. Both formats can be 
                  challenging because they may require you to condense a much longer paper into a 15 to 20 minute 
                  presentation. However, learning to present your work is an important academic exercise because it allows 
                  you to share your research, ideas, and arguments with a wider audience. It also invites critical engagement 
                  with your work, which in turn enables you to improve your writing and thinking. Because many 
                  presentations include visual elements (e.g. Power Point), this handout offers guidelines for converting a 
                  written paper into a talk and creating visual material that is appropriate for your topic.  
                   
                  General tips 
                   
                  Many classes in college require a lengthy research paper, and you may be asked to present your research 
                  to your classmates before you have to turn in your final paper. This is a great opportunity to receive 
                  feedback and to polish your argument for the final submission. However, the following question usually 
                  arises: How do I summarize a 10 to 15-page paper for a 15 to 20-minute talk? Below are some tips and 
                  guidelines to help you through this process. 
                   
                   
                  Types of Delivery  
                   
                  Typically, there are two ways of presenting: you are either using notes to guide you through your 
                  presentation, or you read your paper.   
                            
                       •   TALKING WITH NOTES: This can be tricky, as you may find yourself expanding on certain 
                           points more than others, along with losing track of the order of your argument. It is imperative 
                           that you create a document that clearly and equally divides your introduction and thesis, your 
                           main points of evidence, and your conclusion. The only way to avoid going over time (and/or 
                           losing track of the order of your argument) is to practice your talk. Moreover, it means that you 
                           will have to pick major points instead of incorporating everything you have written.   
                   
                  Duke Writing Studio                                                                                                2 
                   
                   
                            
                       •   READING THE PAPER: It takes about 2 to 2.5 minutes to read one page (double-spaced, 12 
                           point font), so if you plan to read your paper out loud, then it should take no longer to read it than 
                           the maximum time allotted. (For example, for a 15 minute presentation, your paper should be 
                           approximately 6 pages long). 
                   
                   
                  This paper is to be heard, not read! 
                            
                       •   When you are preparing your draft for the presentation, keep in mind that your audience will rely 
                           on listening comprehension, not reading comprehension. That means that your ideas need to be 
                           clear and to the point, and organized in a way that makes it possible for your audience to follow 
                           you. Remember to do the following: 
                                o  Introduce yourself (unless you have already been introduced) 
                                o  State your thesis clearly 
                                o  Tell your audience why this topic is relevant 
                                o  Make sure you tell your audience what awaits them. Give them a roadmap of the talk, 
                                    even if it seems redundant to you. (For example: “First I will first consider AAA and its 
                                    relation to HHH, and then I will move on to UUU. I will conclude my discussion with JJJ 
                                    and GGG.”)  
                            
                       •   While you may have incorporated a lot of quotes in your paper, it is much more difficult to cite 
                           other scholars in a presentation. If possible, try to use your own words. When a quotation is 
                           necessary to make your point, use a signal phrase to introduce the source to your audience. For 
                           example, you can say: “As theorist Sandra Somebody states…” or “Theorist Sandra Somebody 
                           has argued that…” 
                                o  If you want to convey a general opinion people in a scholarly field share—and especially 
                                    if you want to point out your scholarly intervention—it is important to let your audience 
                                    know that you understand the central argument the other scholars are making before 
                                    stating your own position. One way to address this kind of situation is the following: 
                                    “Scholars agree that ZZZ causes FFF. However, I propose that….” 
                            
                       •   Don’t forget about the conclusion. Your audience has just listened to many of your arguments and 
                           observations, but they may have already forgotten some of them. Make sure to remind them how 
                           you came to your conclusion and why your scholarly intervention and analysis matter.  
                                o  For example, you can start your conclusion by stating: “As my presentation today has 
                                    shown, SSSS’s relationship to HHH is contingent on # factors (a,b,c). By way of 
                                    conclusion, I would like to argue that… (summarize your main points and give your 
                                    conclusion).” 
                                     
                   
                  Incorporating SLIDES/VISUAL material 
                   
                  Depending on your field of study or the nature of the conference, you will need to show some visual and 
                  textual material during your presentation.  
                            
                       •   A successful visual presentation should be in sync with the spoken part of your presentation. You 
                           can coordinate your talking/reading points with your visual presentation by marking your paper 
                           whenever you will show a next slide. There are countless ways to do so, but here is one example:  
                                o  “ZZZ stands in close to relation to HHH. (SLIDE) As a study from 2008 has shown…” 
                            
                   
                  Duke Writing Studio                                                                                                3 
                   
                   
                       •   Make sure that you address the visual material on the screen. Do not assume that the audience 
                           will “get it.” Many people may still be thinking about your previous point and need your direction 
                           to understanding the relevance of the visuals you are showing. Pointing out what your listeners 
                           are looking at allows them to follow your argument, and perhaps, even better understand it!  
                            
                       •   When you have important points to share, it can be helpful to put text on the slides. Because your 
                           audience is listening to you, and also reading, try to keep the written part short. Reading all your 
                           points from the slides can be tedious for your audience, so short summaries (approximately 2-5 
                           words) may work best. Too much text overwhelms your listeners.  
                            
                                                                                                                 
                       •   If your slides include writing, make sure the font size is large enough and that the color of the 
                           font works well with the background. Legibility is key. 
                            
                       •   SPELL CHECK! It is very easy to overlook typos when you integrate visuals, but the audience 
                           members can see them. A typo can undermine your whole professional demeanor. Be sure to 
                           proofread. 
                            
                       •   Give your audience time to look at the slide. Do not hastily move on. You may have looked at 
                           your slides many times, but your audience needs time to absorb them and understand why each 
                           slide is relevant. 
                            
                       •   Be selective when you choose your images/visuals/graphs. Ask yourself: does this visual 
                           demonstrate my argument? How does it relate to my point? 
                            
                       •   Overall appearance of the visual presentation  
                                o  Keep it simple. While it is nice to have engaging visual graphics in the background of 
                                    your slides, they can be distracting. Make sure that whatever theme you pick actually 
                                    works with the material you are presenting. Sometimes less is more. 
                                     
                                o  Be visually consistent. If you put titles below graphs/visuals for example, then make sure 
                                    you do it the same way for every slide. It shows professionalism and care for your 
                                    presentation. 
                   
                                o  Use high quality images. Sometimes it is easiest to find images online to use for 
                                    presentations. However, the quality varies dramatically, and sometimes you may need to 
                                    scan images in order to retain a professional look. It is therefore important to begin 
                                    preparing your presentation well in advance and avoid last minute additions of low-
                                    resolution images. 
                   
                   
                  Duke Writing Studio                                                                                                4 
                   
                   
                  Practice Makes Perfect 
                            
                       •   The most important thing to do is to practice your talk. The exercise of reading the paper out loud 
                           will help you find mistakes in your draft, such as misspellings and unfinished sentences, and it 
                           will help you judge the general flow and coherence. If you are not reading a paper, make sure you 
                           know your points, and their order, well.  
                            
                       •   Practicing your presentation will make you more confident, as you will become intimately 
                           familiar with the major terms you are using and your own writing and thinking style.  
                   
                       •   The more you practice, the easier it will be to look up at your audience, showing them that you 
                           care about having their attention. The more engaged an audience member is, the more successful 
                           your presentation will be.  
                   
                       •   Do not go over your allotted time. Practicing your talk is the only way you can make sure you 
                           remain within the time you are given. Time yourself. Try to make it a minute shorter than your 
                           allotted time! No matter how interesting and important extra material seems to you, the audience 
                           members, and especially the organizers, do not want to listen to more than they need to. Most 
                           likely, other scholars are giving papers right after you, and you do not want to appear as if you 
                           think your work deserves more time. People usually do not complain about presentations being 
                           “too short.” 
                   
                       •   GROUP PRESENTATIONS: If you are presenting with a colleague, practicing and designing the 
                           talk together will ensure that you are on the same page with your co-presenter. The combination 
                           of your parts should be seamless and consistent.  
                   
                       •   You may want to change the font size of your printed paper or notes to at least 14 point. 
                           Sometimes rooms are not well lit, which makes it difficult to read. 
                   
                   
                  The Culture of Conference Papers 
                   
                  Conferences are great opportunities to network, learn from others, and present your work to other 
                  academic professionals and intellectuals. This can be an intimidating task, but as with any challenge, 
                  preparation makes it easier. Here are a few additional tips on how to present your work—and yourself—
                  in this social context. 
                   
                       •   When you communicate via email with an organizer of a panel or the organizers of your Honors 
                           Thesis presentation, make sure to be prompt, precise, and professional in your correspondences. 
                           If they ask for a draft of your paper two weeks before the presentation, make sure you can deliver 
                           it (or tell them in advance if you cannot meet the deadline). If you exhibit respectful and 
                           responsible behavior during your dealings with the organizers, they will most likely return that 
                           kind of behavior. 
                   
                  
                 Duke Writing Studio                                                                                     5 
                  
                  
                                                 Don’t let your presentation go like this!                 
                                                 (http://www.phdcomics.com/comics.php) 
                  
                  
                     •   When you are at a conference, exhibit confidence and excitement, and stay close to your group of 
                         presenters in the front. Make sure to introduce yourself to the chair(s) of the session, and be ready 
                         to meet and greet a lot of people who may ask you the same questions over and over again.  
                  
                     •   Avoid unnecessary delays. Have your presentation printed (or on an iPad or other device) and 
                         your digital file ready. Do not wait until the last minute to finish your visual presentation, and 
                         make sure your file is not corrupted or too large to be played. Conferences are very time sensitive 
                         and technical difficulties occur regularly, so you do not want to add any extra stress to the 
                         organizers of your panel. 
                  
                     •   Dress the part. Depending on the conference you are attending, the dress code may vary 
                         significantly. Try to dress appropriately and in a way that will make you feel comfortable as well 
                         as professional. This will give you more confidence.  
                   
                  Duke Writing Studio                                                                                                6 
                   
                   
                   
                       •   Q&A: For many scholars, this is the most terrifying part of the presentation. What if you do not 
                           know the answer to a question? 
                   
                                o  Chances are, you know the answer. You have prepared this talk, you have done your 
                                    research, and you have been chosen to present.  
                                o  Sometimes someone may ask you a very complicated (and perhaps even obscure) 
                                    question. At times, it is helpful to “reiterate” what they are asking – (“Am I 
                                    understanding correctly – you are asking such and such?”) That can “buy” you some time 
                                    to think, and it may entice the audience member to be more to the point.  
                                o  Remember that you cannot know EVERYTHING. And that is completely fine. You are 
                                    at the conference to share what you know and also learn from others.  
                                o  Here too, confidence comes with practice. Try to find colleagues or friends who are 
                                    willing to listen to your presentation. Let them ask you questions before you deliver your 
                                    presentation at a conference. This exercise will indicate what may be unclear to audience 
                                    members and what questions you should anticipate being asked. 
                   
                  Last Tip:  
                            
                           Remember that many people get nervous before a talk, even those who have done it many 
                           times. Some things may be out of your control. Try to have fun no matter what! 
                   
                   
                   
                  Other Resources 
                   
                  Mike Dahlin, Giving a Conference Talk 
                  http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~dahlin/professional/goodTalk.pdf 
                   
                  Claremont Graduate Center Writing Center, Presenting Conference Papers in the Humanities 
                  http://www.cgu.edu/pages/864.asp  
                   
                  Columbia University Graduate School of Arts & Sciences Teaching Center, How to Give Highly Effective 
                  Lectures—and  Job Talks and Conference Presentation 
                  http://www.columbia.edu/cu/tat/pdfs/presentations1.pdf  
                   
                  Matthew O. Jackson, Notes on Presenting a Paper 
                  http://www.stanford.edu/~jacksonm/present.pdf  
