                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                How to Convert 
                                                               your Paper into a 
                                                                   Presentation 
                   
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                                                     
                  During your college career, you may be asked to present your academic work in the classroom, at 
                  conferences, or at special events. Two types of talks are common in academia:  presentations in the 
                  classroom (including Honors Thesis presentations) and conference presentations. Both formats can be 
                  challenging because they may require you to condense a much longer paper into a 15 to 20 minute 
                  presentation. However, learning to present your work is an important academic exercise because it allows 
                  you to share your research, ideas, and arguments with a wider audience. It also invites critical engagement 
                  with your work, which in turn enables you to improve your writing and thinking. Because many 
                  presentations include visual elements (e.g. Power Point), this handout offers guidelines for converting a 
                  written paper into a talk and creating visual material that is appropriate for your topic.  
                   
                  General tips 
                   
                  Many classes in college require a lengthy research paper, and you may be asked to present your research 
                  to your classmates before you have to turn in your final paper. This is a great opportunity to receive 
                  feedback and to polish your argument for the final submission. However, the following question usually 
                  arises: How do I summarize a 10 to 15-page paper for a 15 to 20-minute talk? Below are some tips and 
                  guidelines to help you through this process. 
                   
                   
                  Types of Delivery  
                   
                  Typically, there are two ways of presenting: you are either using notes to guide you through your 
                  presentation, or you read your paper.   
                            
                       •   TALKING WITH NOTES: This can be tricky, as you may find yourself expanding on certain 
                           points more than others, along with losing track of the order of your argument. It is imperative 
                           that you create a document that clearly and equally divides your introduction and thesis, your 
                           main points of evidence, and your conclusion. The only way to avoid going over time (and/or 
                           losing track of the order of your argument) is to practice your talk. Moreover, it means that you 
                           will have to pick major points instead of incorporating everything you have written.   
