          HSE       The safe use of
         Health & Safety
          Executive gas cylinders
                        INTRODUCTION
           Accidents involving gas cylinders can cause serious injury or even
           death. This leaflet provides simple practical advice on eliminating or
           reducing the risks associated with using gas cylinders.
           The leaflet is aimed at anyone who manufactures, owns, fills, repairs
           or uses gas cylinders at work. The legal term for gas cylinders is
           transportable pressure receptacles or transportable pressure
           vessels. The advice will be useful for those who own or manage
           small businesses.
           Gas cylinders used in adverse or extreme conditions, such as under
           water, may require special precautions. Although the advice in this
           leaflet is valid for all uses of gas cylinders, these extra precautions
           are not covered.
           As an employer or self-employed person, you have a duty to provide
           a safe workplace and safe work equipment. Designers, inspectors,
           manufacturers, suppliers, users and owners also have duties.
           Employers have a further duty to consult any safety or employee
           representatives on health and safety matters. Where none are
           appointed, employers should consult the workforce directly.
           Uses of gas cylinders
           Gas cylinders are a convenient way to transport and store gases
           under pressure. These gases are used for many different purposes
           including:
           ● chemical processes;
           ● soldering, welding and flame cutting;
                              1
           ● breathing (eg diving, emergency rescue);
           ● medical and laboratory uses;
           ● dispensing beverages;
           ● fuel for vehicles (eg fork-lift trucks);
           ● extinguishing fires;
           ● heating and cooking;
           ● water treatment.
           The main hazards are:
           ● impact from the blast of a gas cylinder explosion or rapid 
             release of compressed gas;
           ● impact from parts of gas cylinders that fail, or any flying debris;
           ● contact with the released gas or fluid (such as chlorine);
           ● fire resulting from the escape of flammable gases or 
             fluids (such as liquefied petroleum gas);
           ● impact from falling cylinders;
           ● manual handling injuries.
           The main causes of accidents are:
           ● inadequate training and supervision;
           ● poor installation;
           ● poor examination and maintenance; 
           ● faulty equipment and / or design (eg badly fitted valves 
             and regulators);
           ● poor handling;
           ● poor storage;
           ● inadequately ventilated working conditions;
           ● incorrect filling procedures;
           ● hidden damage.
                              2
                      HOW TO REDUCE THE RISKS
            All gas cylinders must be designed and manufactured to an
            approved specification to withstand everyday use and to prevent
            danger (see Legislation, page 10). They must be periodically
            examined at appropriate intervals to ensure that they remain safe in
            service. To reduce the risks of failure you need to know, and act on,
            the following precautions.
            Training
            Anyone who examines, refurbishes, fills or uses a gas cylinder
            should be suitably trained and have the necessary skills to carry out
            their job safely. They should understand the risks associated with the
            gas cylinder and its contents.
            In particular:
            ●  new employees should receive 
               training and be supervised closely;
            ●  users should be able to carry out 
               an external visual inspection of 
               the gas cylinder, and any 
               attachments (eg valves, 
               flashback arresters, 
               and regulators),  
               to determine 
               whether they 
               are damaged. 
               Visible indicators 
               may include dents, 
               bulges, evidence of fire 
               damage (scorch marks) and 
               severe grinding marks, etc.
                                 3
           Manufacture and initial examination
           The law requires that gas cylinders are:
           ● manufactured to the design standards and specifications of the 
             relevant legislation (see Table 1 on pages 12/13);
           ● examined by ‘a relevant inspection body’ (see Table 1) to verify 
             that the cylinders are manufactured correctly.
           Owners and fillers should satisfy themselves that the manufacturing
           requirements have been carried out by examining either:
           ● the written certificate which accompanies the gas 
             cylinder; or 
           ● the stamp or mark of the relevant inspection 
             body on the gas cylinder itself (see Table 1). 
           Periodic examination
           If you own or fill gas cylinders, you must ensure
           that they have been examined at the appropriate
           intervals to make sure that they are safe for
           continued use.
           The law requires that all gas cylinders are:
           ● examined and tested by the relevant 
             inspection body, in accordance with 
             relevant regulations and at the appropriate 
             intervals (see Table 1); and
           ● permanently marked by a relevant inspection 
             body to show the date of the last periodic examination.
                              4
           Repair
           The law prohibits modifications (with the exception of neck thread
           cutting) or major repairs to the body of seamless gas cylinders or
           cylinders that have contained acetylene. However, the law does
           allow for modification and major repair (ie hot work), by an
           approved person only, of other types of cylinders, subject to certain
           conditions. These include that a relevant inspection body (see 
           Table 1) marks or certifies the cylinder as being fit for use.
           Where there is minor damage only, refurbishment work which does
           not affect the integrity of the cylinder can be undertaken by a person
           competent to do so.
           Filling
           Anyone carrying out the filling of gas cylinders should wear suitable
           personal protective equipment as appropriate. This may include
           safety shoes, protective overalls, gloves, and ear and eye protection.
           Before filling a gas cylinder check that:
           ● from the markings on the cylinder, it has been properly 
             examined by a relevant inspection body and is still within its 
             due test date;
           ● it shows no sign of damage, external corrosion, falsification 
             (defacing) of markings or illicit repairs that may affect integrity;
             If it is necessary to alter some cylinder markings, eg because 
             of a change in tare weight, it is preferable that this is done by 
             overstamping the old markings with ‘XXX’, not by grinding 
             them off. Grinding can reduce cylinder wall thickness to 
             unsafe levels and shorten cylinder life.
                              5
           ● it is suitable for the gas/fluid with which it is to be filled; 
           ● from the markings on the cylinder, the safe operating limits are 
             established;
           ● valves, fittings and regulators (where fitted) are:
             -  correctly fitted and not leaking;
             -  not damaged and in good working condition;
             -  suitable for their intended purpose; 
             -  not contaminated, eg with incompatible lubricants.
           If any of the above conditions are not met, then the cylinder must
           not be filled.
           After filling a gas cylinder check that:
           ● it is within its safe operating limits;
           ● it is not overfilled or 
             overpressurised. In the event 
             of inadvertent overfilling, 
             any excess gas must be 
             removed in a safe manner 
             and the cylinder checked for 
             further fitness for service;
           ● the cylinder’s valves, fittings 
             and regulators are not 
             leaking, for example by 
             using special equipment, 
             such as ‘sniffers’ or manometers.
             If appropriate, the simple method 
             of using a soapy water solution can be 
             adopted.
                              6
           Handling and use
           ● Use gas cylinders in a vertical position, unless specifically 
             designed to be used otherwise.
           ● Securely restrain cylinders to prevent them falling over.
           ● Always double check that the cylinder/gas is the right one for 
             the intended use.
           ● Before connecting a gas 
             cylinder to equipment or
             pipework make sure 
             that the regulator and 
             pipework are suitable 
             for the type of gas and
             pressure being used.          x
           ● When required, wear 
             suitable safety shoes 
             and other personal 
             protective equipment 
             when handling gas 
             cylinders.
           ● Do notuse gas cylinders for any other 
             purpose than the transport and storage of gas.
           ● Do notdrop, roll or drag gas cylinders.
           ● Close the cylinder valve and replace dust caps, where provided, 
             when a gas cylinder is not in use.
           ● Where appropriate, fit cylinders with residual pressure valves 
             (non-return valves) to reduce the risk of back flow of water or 
             other materials into the cylinder during use that might corrode it
             (eg beer forced into an empty gas cylinder during cylinder 
             change-over).
                              7
           Lifting 
           ● Use suitable cradles, slings, clamps or other effective means 
             when lifting cylinders with a hoist or crane.
           ● Do notuse valves, shrouds and caps for lifting cylinders unless 
             they have been designed and manufactured for this purpose.
           ● Gas cylinders should not be raised or lowered on the forks of lift
             trucks unless adequate precautions are taken to prevent them 
             from falling.
           Transport 
           ● Fit suitable protective valve caps and covers to cylinders, when 
             necessary, before transporting. Caps and covers help prevent 
             moisture and dirt from gathering in the valve of
             the cylinder, in addition to providing 
             protection during transport. 
           ● Securely stow gas cylinders 
             to prevent them from 
             moving or falling. This is 
             normally in the vertical 
             position, unless instructions 
             for transport state otherwise.
           ● Disconnect regulators and hoses
             from cylinders whenever practicable.
           ● Do notlet gas cylinders project beyond the 
             sides or end of  vehicles (eg fork-lift trucks).
           ● Ensure gas cylinders are clearly marked to show their contents 
             (including their UN number) and the danger signs associated 
             with their contents.
           ● It may be necessary to take special measures with certain types 
             and quantities of compressed gases and fluids in order to ensure 
                              8
             their safe carriage. If you have any doubts seek further guidance 
             (see Further advice, page 15).
           ● The transport of gas cylinders is subject to carriage 
             requirements. For example, that:
             -  the vehicle is suitable for the purpose;
             -  the vehicle is suitably marked to show that it is carrying 
                dangerous goods;
             -  the driver is suitably trained; and
             -  the driver carries the appropriate documentation about the 
                nature of the gases being carried. 
           Storage
           ● Store gas cylinders in a dry, safe place on a flat surface in the 
             open air. If this is not reasonably practicable, store in an 
             adequately ventilated building or part of a building specifically 
             reserved for this purpose.
           ● Gas cylinders containing flammable gas should not be stored in 
             part of a building used for other purposes.
           ● Protect gas cylinders from external heat sources that may 
             adversely affect their mechanical integrity.
           ● Gas cylinders should be stored away from sources of ignition 
             and other flammable materials.
           ● Avoid storing gas cylinders so that they stand or lie in water.
           ● Ensure the valve is kept shut on empty cylinders to prevent 
             contaminants getting in.
           ● Store gas cylinders securely when they are not in use. They 
             should be properly restrained, unless designed to be freestanding.
           ● Gas cylinders must be clearly marked to show what they contain 
             and the hazards associated with their contents. 
           ● Store cylinders where they are not vulnerable to hazards caused 
             by impact, eg from vehicles such as fork-lift trucks. 
                              9
                           LEGISLATION
            The five main sets of Regulations covering gas cylinders are:
            ● The Transportable Pressure Vessels Regulations 2001 (SI 
              2001/1426) (TPV Regulations) came fully into force on 1 July 
              2001. They allow for the free movement and use of transportable
              pressure vessels (ie gas cylinders which are designed, 
              manufactured and examined to the requirements of the TPV 
              Regulations) across the European Union (EU) and Great 
              Britain (GB).
            ● The Carriage of Dangerous Goods (Classification, Packaging 
              and Labelling) and Use of Transportable Pressure Receptacles 
              Regulations 1996 (SI 1996/2092), as amended (CDGCPL2 
              Regulations) cover the design, manufacture and examination 
              of gas cylinders which are only for the domestic market in GB.
            ● The Gas Cylinders (Pattern Approval) Regulations 1987 
              (SI 1987/116) (Pattern Approval Regulations) for EEC-type 
              cylinders cover the design and manufacture of EEC-type 
              cylinders (under European Directives 84/525/EEC, 84/526/EEC
              and 84/527/EEC) for both the domestic and EU markets.
            ● The Pressure Vessels (Verification) Regulations 1998 (SI 
              1988/896) (Verification Regulations) cover the initial 
              examination and verification of EEC-type cylinders (under 
              European Directives 84/525/EEC, 84/526/EEC and 
              84/527/EEC) for both the domestic and the EU markets.
            ● The Pressure Equipment Regulations 1999 (SI 1999/2001) (PE 
              Regulations) cover within their scope the design, manufacture 
              and initial integrity of cylinders used in breathing appliances 
              and portable fire extinguishers, together with valves and other 
              accessories used with these gas cylinders which have a direct 
              safety function. For periodic examination these cylinders are 
              governed by the requirements of the CDGCPL2 Regulations. 
                                10
           The TPV Regulations do not apply to the gas cylinders used in
           breathing appliances (including diving cylinders) or portable fire
           extinguishers. Manufacturers, suppliers, users and owners of
           diving cylinders are required to comply with the requirements of
           either the CDGCPL2 Regulations, the Pattern Approval
           Regulations or the PE Regulations.
           The first four sets of Regulations allow owners of cylinders
           manufactured before 1 July 2003 a number of choices.
           For new cylinders, either:
           ● continue to comply with the requirements of the CDGCPL2 
             Regulations if the cylinders are for use only in GB; or 
           ● continue to comply with the Pattern Approval and Verification 
             Regulations if they are EEC-type cylinders; or
           ● comply with the requirements of the TPV Regulations, if the 
             cylinders are for use throughout the EU and GB.
           For existing cylinders, either:
           ● continue to comply with the requirements of the CDGCPL2 
             Regulations if the cylinders are for use only in GB; or
           ● have the cylinders reassessed in accordance with the TPV 
             Regulations if they are to be used throughout the EU. However, 
             in the case of EEC-type cylinders, reassessment under the TPV 
             Regulations is not needed. These cylinders may be given a pi-
             mark (π-mark) at their first periodic inspection after the TPV 
             Regulations come into force.
           Additional advice and guidance is listed at the end of this leaflet.
                              11
                                               HSE
                                               Safety
                          Periodic examinationEU anddomesticmarket:the date of the examinationand ID number ofnotified orapproved bodyDate of theexamination
                                            and          4
                                            π-mark
                        Cylinder markingsReassessmentEU and domestic  market:   a ID number of notified or approved body under certain conditions-
                                            3
                                                    -mark and
                                                    π  ID number of anotified body
                          Initial examination and verificationDomestic market: ID number of notified or approved bodyEU market:a Verification mark
                                               2
                        Manufacturing and design standardsSchedule 2 of TPV Regulations or standard approved by Standard approved by HSE
                                       1
                                                                 6
                  Summary of the law
                          Periodic examinationNotified orapproved bodyappointed bythe Health andExecutive(HSE)Competent person
                          ReassessmentNotified or approved bodyappointed bythe Health and Executive(HSE)-
                        Relevant inspection bodies
                                                                 5
                                                               approved
                          Initial examination and verificationNotified or approved body appointed by the Health andSafety Safety Executive (HSE)HSEperson
                                                                 (GB)
            Table 1     Regulations and scope of applicationTPV Regulations(EU and GB)CDGCPL2Regulations
                                          12
                        mark 
                   Date of theexaminationDate of theexamination
                   -                   -
                          ’ and 
                          3            and 
                             ’ and the mark 
                             e  of the inspection bodyCE mark
                   Pattern approval and EEC symbols ‘ ‘ID number of notified body or user inspectorate
                   Pattern approval issued under EU Directives, verification 84/525/EEC, 84/526/EEC and 84/527/EEC Essential safety requirements of PE Regulations or harmonised standards
                     6                    6
                   Competentperson     Competentperson
                   -                   -
                                            8
                     7
                   Inspection body     Notified bodyor user inspectoratesappointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry
                   Pattern Approval  and Verification Regulations(EU and GB)PE Regulations (EU and GB)
                                          13
                          Notes
                          1    Examination and testing to be carried out in accordance with Chapter 6.2 of 
                               the European agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous 
                               goods by road (ADR 2001) and at the intervals specified in the relevant 
                               packing instruction (P200 or P203 in 4.1.4.1 of ADR 2001).
                          2    HSE will charge an applicant or body a fee for the approval of a new standard 
                               which meets the relevant requirements of [chapter 6.2] of ADR 2001.
                          3    Until 30 June 2003, manufacturers of new TPVs which are for use only in the 
                               domestic market in GB may have their TPVs initially examined and verified 
                               by either a notified or approved body under the TPV Regulations or by a HSE 
                               approved person under the CDGCPL2 Regulations. 
                          4    Owners of existing gas cylinders manufactured before 1 July 2003 in 
                               accordance with the CDGCPL2 Regulations but which meet the requirements 
                               of the TPV Regulations may have their cylinders reassessed by a notified or 
                               approved body and be π-marked to allow the free movement of such gas 
                               cylinders throughout the EU. Periodic examination of these cylinders would 
                               then be carried out by a notified or approved body.
                          5    New cylinders manufactured in accordance with the CDGCPL2 Regulations 
                               must be initially examined by a HSE approved person. 
                          6    Periodic examination of cylinders manufactured in accordance with the 
                               CDGCPL2, Pattern Approval, Verification and PE Regulations must be carried
                               out by a competent person. A competent person is an individual person or 
                               body who has the necessary skills, knowledge of the law, experience and 
                               expertise to carry out a thorough examination and test of a gas cylinder to 
                               determine whether it is safe for continued use.
                          7    EEC-type cylinders are required to have an initial examination and verification
                               by an inspection body appointed by the HSE under the Verification 
                               Regulations. The inspection body will carry out an examination, affix EEC 
                               verification marks to the cylinders and issue EEC verification certificates.
                          8    Gas cylinders designed and manufactured under the PE Regulations are 
                               required to have their initial examination and verification carried out by a 
                               notified body appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. 
                          Lists of HSE notified and approved bodies and standards approved by HSE
                          are available on the HSE website at www.hse.gov.uk/signpost/index.htm
                          under the entry for transportable pressure equipment.
                                                                          14
                         FURTHER ADVICE
            Contact the following:
            ● Your local HSE office - the number can be obtained from 
              directory enquiries or the phone book under ‘Health and Safety 
              Executive’ or from HSE’s website.
            ● Information on HSE approved standards can be obtained from 
              HSE Technology Division 5, Magdalen House, Stanley Precinct, 
              Bootle, Merseyside L20 3QZ, Tel: 0151 951 4514 or from HSE’s 
              website at www.hse.gov.uk/signpost/index.htm.
            ● For premises covered by the local authority eg offices, shops and
              public houses, contact the Local Authority Unit enquiry point: 
              Tel: 020 7717 6442, Fax: 020 7717 6418.
            ● The United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) can advise 
              on competent persons and notified and approved bodies. UKAS 
              can be contacted at 21-47 High Street, Feltham, Middlesex 
              TW13 4UN, Tel: 020 8917 8435, Fax: 020 8917 8499, or from their 
              website at www.ukas.com.
            Related Regulations, guidance and further information
            This leaflet tells you about the main dangers of gas cylinders and of
            some of your legal responsibilities. For more detail you should 
            refer to:
            The Transportable Pressure Vessels Regulations 2001 SI 2001/1426
            The Stationery Office 2001 ISBN 0 11 029347 9
            The Carriage of Dangerous Goods (Classification, Packaging and
            Labelling) and Use of Transportable Pressure Receptacles
            Regulations 1996 SI 1996/2092 (as amended) The Stationery Office
            1996 ISBN 0 11 062923 X
                                15
           The Gas Cylinders (Pattern Approval) Regulations 1987 SI 1987/116
           The Stationery Office 1987 ISBN 0 11 076116 2
           The Pressure Vessels (Verification) Regulations 1988 SI 1988/896 
           The Stationery Office 1988 ISBN 0 11 086896 X
           The Pressure Equipment Regulations 1999 SI 1999/2001 
           The Stationery Office 1999 ISBN 0 11 082790 2
           European Agreement concerning the international carriage of
           dangerous goods by road (ADR) and protocol of signature done at
           Geneva on 30 September 1957
           Guidelines on the appointment of conformity assessment bodies for
           transportable pressure vessels in Great Britain. Transportable Pressure
           Vessels Regulations 2001 (copies available from HSE at 020 7717 6695
           or from HSE’s website at www.hse.gov.uk/signpost/index.htm)
           The Highly Flammable Liquids and Liquefied Petroleum Gases
           Regulations 1972 SI 1972/917 The Stationery Office 
           ISBN 0 11 880382 4
           Manual Handling: Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992
           Guidance on Regulations L23 HSE Books 1998 ISBN 0 7176 2415 3
           Safe use of lifting equipment: Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment
           Regulations 1998 Approved Code of Practice and Guidance L113 HSE
           Books 1998 ISBN 0 7176 1628 2
           Chemical warehousing: The storage of packaged dangerous substances
           HSG71 HSE Books 1998 ISBN 0 7176 1484 0
           The carriage of dangerous goods explained. Part 2. Guidance for road
           vehicle operators and others involved in the carriage of dangerous goods by
           road HSG161 HSE Books 1996 ISBN 0 7176 1253 8
                              16
           The safe use of compressed gases in welding, flame cutting and allied
           processes HSG139 1997 ISBN 0 7176 0680 5
           Cylinder retest stations IGC Doc 79/01/E EIGA. 
           Available on their website: www.eiga.org
           The Storage of Full and Empty LPG Cylinders and Cartridges. LP Gas
           Association Code of Practice No 7. Available from the LP Gas
           Association, address given below. 
           While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the references and
           websites listed in this publication, their future availability cannot be
           guaranteed.
           Regulations are available from:
           The Stationery Office (formerly HMSO), The Publications Centre, 
           PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT, Tel: 0870 600 5522, Fax: 0870 600 5533
           Further guidance may be obtained from:
           The British Compressed Gases Association, 14 Tollgate, Eastleigh,
           Hampshire SO53 3TG, Tel: 01703 641488
           The LP Gas Association, Pavilion 16, Headlands Business Park,
           Salisbury Road, Ringwood, Hampshire BH24 3PB, Tel: 01425 461162
           For further guidance on diving cylinders contact:
           ASSET, 12 Coulston Road, Lancaster, Tel: 01524 381831
           IDEST, Scuba Industry Trade Association admin office, 
           29 Ravenswood Avenue, West Wickham, Kent BR4 0AN, 
           Tel: 020 8777 6740.
                              17
           HSE priced and free publications are available by mail order from
           HSE Books, PO Box 1999, Sudbury, Suffolk CO10 2WA 
           Tel: 01787 881165 Fax: 01787 313995 Website: www.hsebooks.co.uk 
           (HSE priced publications are also available from bookshops.)
           For information about health and safety ring HSE's InfoLine 
           Tel: 08701 545500 Fax: 02920 859260 e-mail:
           hseinformationservices@natbrit.com or write to HSE Information
           Services, Caerphilly Business Park, Caerphilly CF83 3GG. You can
           also visit HSE’s website: www.hse.gov.uk
              This leaflet contains notes on good practice which are not
              compulsory but which you may find helpful in considering
                         what you need to do.
             This leaflet is available in priced packs of 10 from HSE Books, 
             ISBN 0 7176 2332 7. Single free copies are also available from 
                           HSEBooks.
            This publication may be freely reproduced except for advertising,
           endorsement or commercial purposes. First published 4/02. Please
                     acknowledge the source as HSE.
              Printed and published by the Health and Safety Executive
                      INDG308(rev1)    4/02      C250
                              18
