 
                      EXTERNAL GUIDELINE FOR THE APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 62 
                                                 OF THE BELGIAN BANKING LAW 
                     
                     
                    TYPES OF ACCUMULATION RESTRICTIONS - STRUCTURE OF ARTICLE 62 
                     
                    The legal accumulation restrictions, as stated in Article 62 of the Law of 25 April 2014 on the legal 
                    status and supervision of credit institutions and stockbroking firms (hereinafter the "Banking Law"), 
                    can be divided into two categories, namely: 
                         >    qualitative restrictions: see Article 62, §4, §5, first sentence, and §6, first sentence, of the 
                              Banking Law; 
                         >    quantitative restrictions: see overarching principle in Article 62, §1, and further elaboration 
                              in Article 62, §5, second sentence, §6, second sentence, in conjunction with Article 62, §7 
                              and §9. 
                     
                    According to Article 62, §3, of the Banking Law, all credit institution are required to develop an 
                    internal policy on external mandates. This policy may include both qualitative and quantitative 
                    provisions. 
                     
                    With respect to the (mixed) financial holding companies and third country branches, Articles 212 
                    and 335, 3°, of the Banking Law contain references to the aforementioned Article 62. 
                     
                     
                    SCOPE OF APPLICATION 
                     
                    The scope of application varies depending on whether the accumulation restrictions are qualitative 
                    or quantitative. Quantitative restrictions have a narrower scope of application than qualitative 
                    restrictions. The scope of each of these two categories will be further elucidated below on the basis 
                    of the following four criteria: 
                          1)  Which external mandates? 
                          2)  Within which entities? 
                          3)  Exercised by whom? 
                          4)  Significant or non-significant credit institution or (mixed) financial holding company? 
                     
                     
                    A.      QUALITATIVE RESTRICTIONS 
                          1)  external mandates as director or manager or participant in administration or policy-making, 
                              whether or not representing the credit institution or (mixed) financial holding company, 
                          2)  ... of a commercial company, a company having a commercial form, a company with 
                              another Belgian or foreign legal form or a Belgian or foreign public institution with industrial, 
                              commercial or financial activities 
                                  o  associations fall outside the scope of these restrictions; 
                                  o  "company" implies a motive of profit 
                          3)  ... exercised by members of the bodies of the credit institution or (mixed) financial holding 
                              company and any person who, under whatever name and in whatever capacity, participates 
                              in the administration or policy-making 
                          4)  ... regardless of whether the credit institution or the (mixed) financial holding company is 
                              significant. 
                                                           
