        A. M. Turing (1950) Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind 49: 433-460.  
                                             
             COMPUTING MACHINERY AND INTELLIGENCE 
                           
                      By A. M. Turing 
        1. The Imitation Game 
        I propose to consider the question, "Can machines think?" This should begin with 
        definitions of the meaning of the terms "machine" and "think." The definitions might be 
        framed so as to reflect so far as possible the normal use of the words, but this attitude is 
        dangerous, If the meaning of the words "machine" and "think" are to be found by 
        examining how they are commonly used it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the 
        meaning and the answer to the question, "Can machines think?" is to be sought in a 
        statistical survey such as a Gallup poll. But this is absurd. Instead of attempting such a 
        definition I shall replace the question by another, which is closely related to it and is 
        expressed in relatively unambiguous words. 
        The new form of the problem can be described in terms of a game which we call the 
        'imitation game." It is played with three people, a man (A), a woman (B), and an 
        interrogator (C) who may be of either sex. The interrogator stays in a room apart front the 
        other two. The object of the game for the interrogator is to determine which of the other 
        two is the man and which is the woman. He knows them by labels X and Y, and at the 
        end of the game he says either "X is A and Y is B" or "X is B and Y is A." The 
        interrogator is allowed to put questions to A and B thus: 
        C: Will X please tell me the length of his or her hair? 
        Now suppose X is actually A, then A must answer. It is A's object in the game to try and 
        cause C to make the wrong identification. His answer might therefore be: 
        "My hair is shingled, and the longest strands are about nine inches long." 
        In order that tones of voice may not help the interrogator the answers should be written, 
        or better still, typewritten. The ideal arrangement is to have a teleprinter communicating 
        between the two rooms. Alternatively the question and answers can be repeated by an 
        intermediary. The object of the game for the third player (B) is to help the interrogator. 
        The best strategy for her is probably to give truthful answers. She can add such things as 
        "I am the woman, don't listen to him!" to her answers, but it will avail nothing as the man 
        can make similar remarks.  
        We now ask the question, "What will happen when a machine takes the part of A in this 
        game?" Will the interrogator decide wrongly as often when the game is played like this as 
        he does when the game is played between a man and a woman? These questions replace 
        our original, "Can machines think?"  
