                                                                                BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                                                               TABLE OF ACRONYMS 
                             TABLE OF ACRONYMS ...................................................................................................................... 2                                                                            
                             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                             (RECOMMENDATION 8) ................................................................................................................... 3                                                                              
                             I.           INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND ..................................................................................... 4                                                                                     
                             II.          PURPOSE AND CONTEXT ......................................................................................................... 6                                                                          
                             III.         GUIDANCE AND EXAMPLES OF GOOD PRACTICE FOR COUNTRIES ......................................                                                                                                        10 
                                          A.          Understanding the risk ............................................................................................................                                                    10 
                                          B.          Mitigating the risk....................................................................................................................                                                14 
                             IV.          ACTIONS NPOS CAN TAKE TO PROTECT AGAINST TF ABUSE ...............................................                                                                                                  22 
                                          A.          Risk Analysis and Risk-Based Approach ...................................................................................                                                              22 
                                          B.          Mitigating the Risk ...................................................................................................................                                                22 
                                          C.          Self-Regulation ........................................................................................................................                                               23 
                             V.           ACCESS OF NPOS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES ...........................................................................                                                                                   28 
                             ANNEX 1  EXAMPLES OF MEASURES THAT COUNTRIES HAVE IMPLEMENTED AND WHICH 
                             MAY, DEPENDING ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES, HELP TO MITIGATE RISK ........................................                                                                                                             32 
                                          OUTREACH TO THE SECTOR ..............................................................................................................                                                              33 
                                          SUPERVISION OR MONITORING ........................................................................................................                                                                 38 
                                          EFFECTIVE INVESTIGATION AND INFORMATION GATHERING ..........................................................                                                                                       40 
                                          EFFECTIVE MECHANISMS FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION ......................................................                                                                                          43 
                             ANNEX 2  EXAMPLES OF MEASURES THAT NPOS HAVE IMPLEMENTED AND WHICH MAY, 
                             DEPENDING ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES, HELP TO MITIGATE RISK .................................................                                                                                                         44 
                                          ORGANISATIONAL INTEGRITY ...........................................................................................................                                                               45 
                                          PARTNER RELATIONSHIPS .................................................................................................................                                                            50 
                                          FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY .........................................................................                                                                                52 
                                          PROGRAMME PLANNING AND MONITORING ..................................................................................                                                                               56 
                             ANNEX 3  A LIST OF REPRESENTATIONAL AND SELF-REGULATORY ORGANISATIONS .................. 59 
                             REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHIE .................................................................................................                                                                                  68 
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                         
                              2015                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 
        BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
        RECOMMENDATION 8 
                            TABLE OF ACRONYMS 
        AML             Anti-money laundering 
        CRA             Canada Revenue Agency 
        CFT             Countering the financing of terrorism 
        DNFBP           Designated non-financial businesses and professions 
        FIU             Financial intelligence unit 
        ML              Money laundering 
        NGO             Non-government organisation 
        NPO             Non-profit organisation 
        RBA             Risk-based approach 
        TF              Terrorist financing 
        UNSCR           United Nations Security Council Resolution 
         
        2                                                      2015  
                       BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                           RECOMMENDATION 8 
         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT 
                     ORGANISATIONS (RECOMMENDATION 8) 
         This guidance paper should be read in conjunction with:  
                       the FATF Recommendations, especially Recommendation 8 and its 
                       Interpretive Note, and Recommendation 1 and its Interpretive Note, and 
                       the FATF typologies report on the Risk of Terrorist Abuse in Non-Profit 
                       Organisations.  
         Other relevant FATF documents include: 
                       the guidance on National Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk 
                       Assessment 
                       the typologies report on Terrorist Financing 
                       the Risk-Based Approach Guidance for the Banking Sector, and  
                       the Revised Guidance on AML/CFT and Financial Inclusion. 
         2015                                                      3 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
             I.           INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
             1.     The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Best Practices Paper on Combating the Abuse of Non-
             Profit Organisations was first written in 2002 at a time when the FATF had just introduced 
             standards to address specific terrorist financing (TF) vulnerabilities and threats in the wake of 
             the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks. Since then, the threat environment has evolved, 
             government experience implementing Recommendation 8 has advanced, and thproe nofit  n-
             organisation (NPO) sector and self-regulatory mechanisms have also continued to evolve. A limited 
             update of the best practices paper was conducted in 2013 with specific input from the NPO sector to 
             reflect the revised FATF Recommendations and the need to protect the legitimate activities of NPOs. 
             The FATF published a typologies report on theR isk of Terrorist Abuse in Non-Profit Organisations 
             (the typologies report) in June 2014, and the best practices paper has now been further revised to 
             reflect some of the findings of that report along with additional input and examples of good practice 
             from governments and the private sector.   
             2.     The FATF recognise sthe vital importance of the NPO community in providing charitable 
             services around the world, as well as the difficulty of providing assistance to those in need, often in 
             remote regions, and applauds the efforts of the NPO community to meet such needs. One of the main 
             objectives of this best practices paper is to facilitate NPO efforts and protect the integrity of the NPO 
             sector by providing examples of additional ways that governments and the NPO sector can work 
             towards protecting the global NPO sector from terrorist abuse. These good practices are not 
             mandatory elements of the FATF Standards1, and are included as examples only.  
             3.     The FATF is committed to maintaining a close and constructive dialogue with the private 
             sector, including the NPO sector, as important partners in ensuring the integrity of the financial 
             system. 
             4.     The FATF recognises the intent and efforts to date of the NPO community to promote 
             transparency within their operations and to prevent misuse of the sector by those wishing to 
             support terrorist financing and terrorist organisations. The NPO sector in many countries has 
             representational and self-regulatory organisations that have developed standards and initiatives to 
             help individual organisations ensure accountability and transparency in their operations, including 
             strengthened internal controls and risk mitigation measures. A sampling of representational and 
             self-regulatory organisations can be found in Annex 3. 
             5.     However, more than a decade after the abuse of NPOs by terrorists and terrorist 
             organisations was formally recognised as a concern, some NPOs in the sector continue to be 
             misused and exploited by terrorists through a variety of means. In fact, terrorist actors will often 
             employ deception to mask their activities, particularly those in conflict regions.- Wplanneell d 
             deceptions by terrorists abusing the NPO sector ar  deifficult to penetrate with the resources 
                                                                   
             1     The FATF Standards comprise the FATF Recommendations and their Interpretive Notes. 
             4                                                                                           2015  
                  BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                               RECOMMENDATION 8 
       available to non-governmental actors, making state-based oversight and its capabilities a necessary 
       element to detecting the most sophisticated terrorist threats to the NPO sector. 
        2015                                        5 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
             II.          PURPOSE AND CONTEXT 
             6.     The purpose of this best practices paper is to set out specific examples of good practice 
             which:                               2 in their implementation of Recommendation 8 on non-profit 
                     a)  Primarily assist countries
                         organisations, in line with Recommendati1on a  nd the ri-sbkased approach, and 
                         consistent with countries’ obligations to respect freedom of association, assembly, 
                         expression, religion or belief, and international humanitarian law;3   
                      b)  May assist NPOs which fall within the scope of the FATF definition of a non-profit 
                         organisation to help meet the objectives of Recommendation 8 and mitigate TF threats 
                         they may face; and 
                     c)  May assist financial institutions in the proper implementation of a risk-based approach 
                         when providing financial services to NPOs, and guide donors who are providing funding 
                         to NPOs.  
             7.     The following context is particularly important to keep in mind when implementing the 
             requirements of Recommendation 8 and its Interpretive Note, and when considering the examples 
             of good practice set out in this paper: 
                    a)  Recommendation 8 does not apply to the NPO sector as a whole. Countries should take a 
                       targeted approach to implementing the measures called for in Recommendation 8, 
                       including oversight and regulatory mechanisms, based on an understanding of the 
                       diversity of the NPO sector and the terrorism risks faced by the domestic NPO sector. 
                       Given the variety of legal forms that NPOs can have, depending on the country, the FATF 
                       has adopted a functional definition of NPO. This definition is based on those activities and 
                       characteristics of an organisation which put it at risk of terrorist abuse, rather than on the 
                       simple fact that it is operating on a nonp-rofit basis. Recommendation 8 only applies to 
                       those NPOs which fall within the FATF definition of a non-profit organisation.  
                                                                   
             2     All references to country or countries apply equally to territories or jurisdictions. 
             3     See also the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted in September 2006, which 
                   includes section IV. Measures to ensure respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the 
                   fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism. 
                   The Preamble of the UN Security Council Resolution 2129(2013) states that the Council recognises “the 
                   need for Member States to prevent the abuse o-gfo nvernonmental, nonp-rofit and charitable 
                   organisations by and for terrorists, and calling upon ngonove-rnmental, nonp-rofit, and charitable 
                   organisations to prevent and oppose, as appropriate, attempts by terrorists to abuse their status, while 
                   recalling the importance of fully respecting the rights to freedom of erxepssion and association of 
                   individuals in civil society and freedom of religion or belief, and noting the relevant recommendation 
                   and guidance documents of the Financial Action Task Force”.  
             6                                                                                          2015  
                                         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                        RECOMMENDATION 8 
                             FATF definition of a non-profit organisation  
                             A legal person or arrangement or organisation that primarily engages in raisi ngor 
                             disbursing funds for purposes such as charitable, religious, cultural, educational, 
                             social or fraternal purposes, or for the carrying out of other types of “good works”. 
                          Throughout this report, unless otherwise specified, the term NPO refers only thoso te 
                          NPOs falling within the FATF definition. The term does not apply to the entire universe of 
                          NPOs. 
                          Within the FATF definition of NPO, Recommendation 8 is intended to apply only to those 
                          NPOs that pose the greatest risk of terrorist financing abuse. In some jurisdictions, this 
                          may mean those NPOs that control a significant portion of the financial resources of the 
                          sector and those NPOs that have a substantial share of the sector’s international activities. 
                          In other jurisdictions, a domestic NPO sector reivew combined with an understanding of 
                          the TF risks in the sector may indicate that the risk of terrorist abuse is greater for NPOs 
                          with different characteristics. In some jurisdictions, the TF risk in the sector may be low 
                          based on the context of the country.4   
                      b)  Not all NPOs are high risk, and some may represent little or no risk at all. It may be 
                          possible that existing measures are sufficient to address the current TF risk to the NPO 
                          sector identified in a country, although periodic reviews may identify new or evolved TF 
                          risks over time. This has important implications for both countries and financial 
                          institutions in their implementation of a-ba serids k approach, in line with 
                          Recommendation 1. In particular, it means that a “one size fits all” approach to all NPOs is 
                          not appropriate, either in terms of how countries supervise and monitor the sector, or 
                          how financial institutions manage business relationships with customers who are NPOs. 
                          It is also an important consideration for donors who are providing funding to NPOs. 
                      c)  When applying measures to mitigate the risks that have been identified in their domestic 
                          NPO sector, it is important for countries to take into account the objectives of 
                          Recommendation 8 which are set out in paragraph 3 of its Interpretive Note as follows: 
                                    The objective of Recommendation 8 is to ensure that NPOs are not misused by 
                                    terrorist organisations: (i) to pose as legitimate entities; (ii) to exploit legitimate 
                                    entities as conduits for terrorist financing, including for the purpose oesfcap    ing 
                                    asset freezing measures; or (iii) to conceal or obscure the clandestine diversion of 
                                    funds intended for legitimate purposes, but diverted for terrorist purposes. In this 
                                    Interpretive Note, the approach taken to achieve this objective is based on the 
                                    following general principles: 
                                             a)     Past and ongoing abuse of the NPO sector by terrorists and 
                                                    terrorist organisations requires countries to adopt measures both: 
                                                                     
               4     See paragraph 16 on the findings of the typologies report (FATF, 2014a).  
                2015                                                                                                    7 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                     (i) to protect the sector against such abuse, and (ii) to identify and 
                                                     take effective action against those NPOs that either are exploited 
                                                     by, or actively support, terrorists or terrorist organisations. 
                                              b)     Measures adopted by countries to protect the NPO sector from 
                                                     terrorist abuse should not disrupt or discourage legitimate 
                                                     charitable activities. Rathe rs,uch measures should promote 
                                                     transparency and engender greater confidence in the sector, 
                                                     across the donor community and with the general public, that 
                                                     charitable funds and services reach intended legitimate 
                                                     beneficiaries. Systems that promote achieving a high degree of 
                                                     transparency, integrity and public confidence in the management 
                                                     and functioning of all NPOs are integral to ensuring the sector 
                                                     cannot be misused for terrorist financing. 
                                              c)     Measures adopted by countries to identify and take effective action 
                                                     against NPOs that either are exploited by, or actively support, 
                                                     terrorists or terrorist organisations should aim to prevent and 
                                                     prosecute, as appropriate, terrorist financing and other forms of 
                                                     terrorist support. Where NPOs suspected of, or implicated in, 
                                                     terrorist financing or other forms of terrorist support are 
                                                     identified, the first priority of countries must be to investigate and 
                                                     halt such terrorist financing or support. Actions taken for this 
                                                     purpose should, to the extent reasonably possible, avoid negaveti 
                                                     impact on innocent and legitimate beneficiaries of charitable 
                                                     activity. However, this interest cannot excuse the need to 
                                                     undertake immediate and effective actions to advance the 
                                                     immediate interest of halting terrorist financing or other forms of 
                                                     terrorist support provided by NPOs. 
                                              d)     Developing cooperative relationships among the public, private 
                                                     and NPO sector is critical to raising awareness and fostering 
                                                     capabilities to combat terrorist abuse within the sector. Countries 
                                                     should encourage the development of academic research on, and 
                                                     information sharing in, the NPO sector to address terrorist 
                                                     financing related issues. 
                                              e)     A targeted approach in dealing with the terrorist threat to the 
                                                     NPO sector is essential given the diversity within individual 
                                                     national sectors, the differing degrees to which parts of each sector 
                                                     may be vulnerable to misuse by terrorists, the need for legitimate 
                                                     charitable activity to continue to flourish, and the limited 
                                                     resources and authorities available to combat terrorist financing 
                                                     in each country. 
               8                                                                                                      2015  
                                                      BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                            RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                            f)        Flexibility in developing a national response to terrorist financing in 
                                                                      the NPO sector is also essential, in order to allow it to evolve over 
                                                                      time as it faces the changing nature of the terrorist financing threat. 
                             d)  The FATF Recommendation 8 Best Practices Paper, like all FATF best practices papers, is 
                                   not mandatory for assessing compliance with the FATF Standards, but countries and the 
                                   NPO sector may find it valuable to consider it when determining how best to prevent and 
                                   mitigate terrorist abuse in the NPO sector. The specific examples of good practice in this 
                                   paper should not be used as a checklist of requirements to be applied to or by all NP, Os
                                   and are included as examples only. The good practices are not intended to be 
                                   comprehensive. Rather, they are illustrative of the types of measures that, depending on 
                                   the circumstances, are good steps towards meeting the objectives of Recommendatio 8.n 
                                   Although these good practices are considered to be helpful indicators, they may not be 
                                   relevant in all circumstances.  
                             e)  As noted in theInt erpretive Note to Recommendation 8, terrorists and terrorist 
                                   organisations may exploit some NPOs in the sector to raise and move funds, provide 
                                   logistical support, encourage terrorist recruitment, or otherwise support tst  errori
                                   organisations and operations. This misuse not only facilitates terrorist activity, but also 
                                   undermines donor confidence and jeopardises the very integrity of NPOs. Therefore, 
                                   protecting the NPO sector from terrorist abuse is both a critical component o tfhe global 
                                   fight against terrorism and a necessary step to preserve the integrity of the NPO sector 
                                   and donor community. 
                     2015                                                                                                                                        9 
                  BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                  RECOMMENDATION 8 
                  III.            GUIDANCE AND EXAMPLES OF GOOD PRACTICE FOR 
                                  COUNTRIES 
                                                                                         Specific examples of good practice for 
                                                                                         countries can be found in Annex 1. 
                  8.       Recommendation 8 does not operate in isolation. Its implementation should be consistent 
                  with the over-arching requirements of Recommendation 1 on the risk-based approach.  
                  A.       UNDERSTANDING THE RISK 
                  9.       As stated in Recommendation 1, countries should identify, assess, and understand the money 
                  laundering and terrorist financing risks for the contry,u and should take action, including 
                  designating an authority or mechanism to coordinate actions to assess risks, and apply resources, 
                  aimed at ensuring the risks are mitigated effectively. Based on that assessment, countries should 
                  apply a risbaks-ed approach (RBA) to ensure that measures to prevent or mitigate money 
                  laundering and terrorist financing are commensurate with the risks identified. Thi-s rbasieskd 
                  approach should be an essential foundation to efficient allocation of resources across thie- ant
                  money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) regime and the 
                  implementation of measures throughout the FATF Recommendatio. Wns here countries identify 
                  higher risks, they should ensure that their AML/CFT regime adequately addresses such risks. Where 
                  countries identify lower risks, they may decide to allow simplified measures for some of the FATF 
                  Recommendations under certain conditions.   
                  10.      Risk can be defined as the ability of a threat to exploit a vulnerability. For there to be a risk, 
                  both a threat and a vulnerability must be present.  
                                                          Figure 1. Threat+Vulnerability=Risk 
                                                                   Vulnerability                                 Risk 
                                                                  Organisational                          Legitimate NPO  
                                                      +                                      =               is exploited 
                                    Threat 
                                                                      Sectoral                           Sham NPO enters 
                                                      +                                       =               the sector                
                   
                  10                                                                                                                         2015  
                                     BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
              
             11.    A domestic sector review has always been an element of Recommendation 8. However, 
             understanding TF risk and responding appropriately using a risk-based approach to effectively 
             implement Recommendation 8 has become more critical following the adoption of the revised FATF 
             Recommendations which emphasize the risk-based approach. Recommendation 8 requires countries 
             to undertake a domestic review of their entire NPO sector, or have the capacity to obtain timely 
             information on its activities, size and other relevant features, and review the adequacy of laws and 
             regulations that relate to the portion of the NPO sector that can be abused for the financing of 
             terrorism. In undertaking this review, countries should use all available sources of information in 
             order to identify features and types of NPOs which, by virtue of their activities or characteristics, are 
                                                           5
             at risk of being misused for terrorist financing. In other words, a review of the entire sector would 
             identify which subset of organisations fall within the FATF definition of NPO and then identify which 
             NPOs in the subset would be considered higher risk for TF abuse. Countries should also periodically 
             reassess the NPO sector by reviewing new information on the sector’s potential vulnerabilities to 
             terrorist financing activities, trends related to terrorist abuse, and risk mitigation measures. 
             12.    While it is possible that NPOs, like their f-oprrofit counterparts, mayf ace numerous other 
             risks relating to money laundering, fraud, corruption, and tax evasion, Recommendation 8 is only 
             intended to address the particular vulnerability of NPOs to terrorist abuse. Yet risk mitigation 
             measures to protect against other illicit finance threats, including money laundering, can be useful 
             in mitigating terrorist financing risk.  
             13.    An understanding of the domestic NPO sector and the terrorist financing risks it faces are 
                                                                  th
             critical to complying with Recommendation 8 in the 4  round of Mutual Evaluations. The risk-based 
             approach is the foundation for countries to determine how best to mitigate terrorist financing risks, 
             including how to implement the comprehensive approach called for by Recommendation 8 and 
             which elements of the NPO sector should be subject to oversight mechanisms.  
             14.    In practice, conducting a domestic review of the entire NPO sector is a fundamental and 
             necessary starting point for the proper implementation of Recommendation 8, because it enables 
             countries to: 
                    a)  determine which NPOs in their country fall within the scope of the FATF definition of a 
                        non-profit organisation and to which NPOs the country’s TF mitigation measures should 
                        apply; 
                    b)  better understand the domestic NPO sector, including size, type, locations and activities 
                        of NPOs; 
                    c)  understand the terrorist financing risks facing their specific NPO sector, and determine 
                        which laws, regulations, and other measures are already in place whch imight help to 
                        mitigate those risks, in line with Recommendation 8;  
                                                                   
             5     Paragraph 4 of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
              2015                                                                                         11 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                    d)  take the results of the domestic review into account in the context of their national risk 
                       assessment, as appropriate6; and  
                    e)  ascertain whether the laws, regulations, and other measures already in place are 
                                                                                               7, and whether 
                       commensurate with the risks identified, in line with Recommendation 1
                       additional measures are needed to mitigate the risk or if the current measures are 
                       sufficient.  
             15.    Elements of a country’s domestic sector review could include: the size, type, and scope of 
             NPOs, their activities, their donor base, croborss-der activity and financing, movement of funds, 
             means of payments, type and location of activities engaged in, services provided, and the level of 
             risk associated with these elements. 
                                            Box 1. Example of a sector review 
                  The national regulator of registered charities in Canada, the Canada Revenue Agency 
                  (CRA), conducted a domestic review of the entire NPO sr iecn Cto anada in order to 
                  identify which organisations, by virtue of their activities and characteristics, were at 
                  greater risk of being abused for terrorist support.  
                  Specifically, Canada aimed to ensure that: 
                                      It is not taking an overly broad interpretation of the FATF definition 
                                       of NPO; 
                                      It focuses on those organisations that are at greatest risk; and 
                                      It does not burden organisations not at risk with onerous reporting 
                                                                    1
                                       requirements for TF purposes.  
                  The CRA reviewed existing publications and research by governmental, academic, and 
                  non-profit organisations related to the nonp-rofit sector, including reports by Statistics 
                  Canada on nonp-rofit institutes, consultations on regulations affecting the sect, anor d 
                  studies on trends in charitable giving and volunteering. In addition, the CRA looked at 
                  existing laws and reporting requirements affecting non-profit organisations.  
                  To determine where there is risk, NPOs were categorised based on shared characteristics 
                  such as purpose, activities, size and location of operation. The CRA compared those 
                  characteristics with the elements of the FATF definition of NPO. It also took into 
                  consideration the findings of the FATF typologies reporRt isk of Terrorist Abuse in Non-
                                                                   
             6     For additional information on conducting a national risk assessment, see the FATF guidance document 
             7     National Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment (FATF, 2013). 
                   Paragraph 1 of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 1 (FATF, 2012). 
             12                                                                                         2015  
                                           BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
                     Profit Organisations2 to identify features that put organisations a greater risk.  
                     The CRA found that, in Canada, the organisations at greatest risk of terrorist abuse 
                     because of the nature of their activities and characteristics are charities. This means that 
                     in the Canadian context, charities are the organisations that fall within the FATF 
                     definition of NPO. While organisations at greatest risk are charities, not all charities are at 
                     risk. The insight obtained from the sector review allowed Canada to focus on charities as 
                     the starting point for its national risk assessment. 
                     1. See paragraphs 23 and 24. 
                     2. FATF (2014a). 
                                                                                                              8
                16.    The FATF has conducted its own research into the terrorist financing risk sfacing NPOs. In 
                June 2014, the FATF published a typologies report onRisk of                     Terrorist Abuse in NonProfit -
                Organisations9 which analysed 102 case studies submitted by 14 countries from across the globe. 
                The typologies report found that more than a decade after the abuse of NPOs by terrorist entities 
                was formally recognised as a concern, the threat remains. While the abuse of the NPO sector by 
                terrorist entities is, in the context of the global NPO sector, a low-probability risk, the impact of such 
                abuse on the NPO sector goes beyond the narrow consideration of monetary value. Donors trust 
                that resources provided to NPOs, either financial or material, will be used for good works; this trust 
                is the foundation for the NPO sector. The diversion of these resources to benefit entities whose 
                principal goal is to harm, undermines the public’s trust in the NPO sector, which will have a 
                disproportionate impact on NPO operations. That report found a correlation between the types of 
                activities an NPO is engaged in and the risk of terrorist abuse. The report concluded that: 
                       a)  The NPOs most at risk of abuse for terrorist financing are engaged in “service activities”, 
                            meaning programmes focused on providing housing, social services, education, or health 
                            care. This is consistent with the FATF definition of non-profit organisation. Indeed, none 
                            of the NPOs in the case studies analysed were engaging in “expressive activities”, meaning 
                            programmes focused on sports and recreation, arts and culture, interest representation 
                            or advocacy such as political parties, think tanks and advocacy groups. 
                       b)  The risks facing NPOs engaged in service activities are not equal. There is a stronger risk 
                            of abuse for NPOs providing service activities “in close proximity to an active terrorist 
                            threat”. This may refer to an NPO operating:  iin a) n area of conflict where there is an 
                            active terrorist threat; or iid)ome     stically in a country where there is no conflict, but 
                            within a population that is actively targeted by a terrorist movement for support and 
                            cover. In both cases the key variable of risk is not geographic, but the proximity to an 
                            active terrorist threat. Importantly, this does not always correspond to geographic areas 
                            of conflict or low-governance. In areas of conflict or-g loveowrnance where terrorist 
                                                                      
                8     The typologies report defines risk as the potential for harma r as esult of a threat (in this case, 
                      individuals or groups who support terrorism) exploiting a vulnerability/vulnerabilities (in this case, of 
                9     an NPO). 
                      FATF (2014a). 
                 2015                                                                                                        13 
                      BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                      RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                       movements do not or cannot operate, NPOs may face risks associated with corruption or 
                                       criminality, but not necessarily terrorist financing. Conversely, terrorist movements may 
                                       actively target populations within relatively stable environments for support. Ultimately, 
                                       the principal considerations for determining which NPOs are at a higher risk of abuse are 
                                       the value of their resources or activities to terrorist entities, and the proximity to an 
                                                                                                                                                           10
                                       active terrorist threat that has the capability and intent to abuse NPOs .In general, there 
                                       are five categories of abuse or risk facing NPOs: 
                                          i.      The diversion of funds is a significant method of abuse, with actors inside the NPO 
                                                  or external actors (such as foreign partners or thpiradr-ty fundraisers) being 
                                                  responsible for the diversion to support terrorist entities at some point through 
                                                  the NPO’s operational or financial processes;  
                                         ii.      NPOs or their directing officials kwinngoly or unknowingly maintaining an 
                                                  affiliation with a terrorist entiwtyh ich may result in the NPO being abused for 
                                                  multiple purposes, including general logistical support to the terrorist entity; 
                                        iii.      Abuse to support recruitment efforts by terrorist entities; 
                                        iv.       The abuse of programming in which the flow of resources is legitimate, but NPO 
                                                  programmes are abused at the point of delivery; and 
                                         v.       Abuse through false representation in which terrorist entities start “sham” NPOs or 
                                                  falsely represent themselves as the agents of “good works” in order to deceive 
                                                  donors into providing support. Wel-lplanned deceptions are difficult to penetrate 
                                                  with the resources available to n-goovnernmental actors, making stat-ebased 
                                                  oversight and its capabilities a necessary element to detecting the most 
                                                  sophisticated threats to the sector’s activities.11 
                      17.        The typologies report also describes useful: 
                                 a)  risk indicators:  indicators which are ultimately leads requiring further investigation to 
                                       assess the nature or risk of abuse, but which do not necessarily point to terrorism as the 
                                       only possible explanation; and  
                                 b)  terrorist abuse indicators: a smaller subset of indicators.  
                      B.         MITIGATING THE RISK  
                      18.        There is no “one size fits all” approach to mitigating the terrorist financing risks faced by 
                      NPOs. On the contrary, Recommendation 8 expressly acknowledges that there isa d  iverse range of 
                      approaches in identifying, preventing and combating terrorist misuse of NPOs. The Interpretive 
                      Note to Recommendation 8 states that a successful approach in identifying, preventing and 
                      combating terrorist abuse in the NPO sector involves a flexible, multi-faceted four-pronged 
                      approach.  
                                                                            
                      10
                                Page 6 of the FATF Report on Risk of Terrorist Abuse in Non-Profit Organisations (FATF, 2014a). 
                      11
                                Page 5 of the FATF Report on Risk of Terrorist Abuse in Non-Profit Organisations (FATF, 2014a). 
                      14                                                                                                                                                       2015  
                                    BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
             19.    In cases where terrorist abuse in the NPO sector is detected, a variety of measures could be 
             implemented depending on the severity of the case, including regulaort y, administrative actions or 
             targeted financial sanctions, criminal investigation or other actions. However, countries should 
             work to ensure a proportionate response to the TF risk and specific threats they face. The existing 
             regulation(s) and/or other measures, including those adopted to mitigate other risks and illicit 
             activities,12
                         may sufficiently address the current TF risk to the sector, while additional or different 
             measures may need to be considered when existing measures are found inappropriate tmo itigate 
             the risk, or as the TF risk to the sector evolves and changes over time.  
             20.    An effective approach to protecting the NPO sector from abuse as conveyed in 
             Recommendation 8 involves all four of the following elements implemented using a proportionate, 
             risk-based approach:  
                                  Box 2. Effective approach to protecting the NPO sector 
                  An effective approach to protecting the NPO sector involves the following four elements: 
                      1)  Ongoing outreach to the sector; 
                      2)  Proportionate, risk-based supervision or monitoring; 
                      3)  Effective investigation and information gathering; and 
                      4)  Effective mechanisms for international cooperation.1 
                  1. Paragraph 5 of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
              
             21.    This does not mean that all NPOs should be made subject to the same measures. This is 
             consistent with Recommendation 1 which requires countries to ensure that measures to prevent or 
             mitigate money laundering and terrorist financing are commensurate with the risks identified. This 
             means that enhanced measures should be applied where risks are higher and, correspondingly, 
             lower, simplified measures may be permitted where risks are lower.  
             22.    Recommendation 8 expressly acknowledges another important consideration when applying 
             risk mitigation measures to the NPO sector. While it is vital to protect NPOs from terrorist abuse, it 
             is also important that the measures taken to protect them do not disrupt or discourage legitimate 
             charitable activities, and should not unduly or inadvertently restrict NPO’s ability to access 
             resources, including financial resources, to carry out their legitimate activities. Rather, such 
             measures should promote transparency and engender greater confidence in the sector, across the 
             donor community and with the general public that charitable funds and services are reaching their 
                                               13
             intended legitimate beneficiaries. Also, as a matter of principle, complying with th e FATF
             Recommendations should not contravene a country’s obligations under the Charter of the United 
             Nations and international human rights law to promote universal respect for, and observance of, 
                                                                   
             12
                   Such as money laundering, fraud, corruption and tax evasion. See paragraph 12.  
             13
                   Paragraph 3 of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
              2015                                                                                        15 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
             fundamental human rights and freedoms, such as freedom of expression, religion or belief, and 
             freedom of peaceful assembly and of association.14  
             23.    In practice, it is important for countries to implement mitigation measures that are 
             commensurate (i.e. proportionate) with the risks identified through a domestic review of the NPO 
             sector and understanding of the TF risks in the sector, avoiding CFT regulatory measures that 
             disproportionately affect or burden NPOs with little to no TF risk, and that are in line with proper 
             implementation of a risk-based approach. This is important because: 
                    a)  not all NPOs face high terrorist financing risks and many NPOs face little or no such risk; 
                    b)  the sector is comprised of an extremely large number of very diverse entities which 
                       means that, in parctice, countries need to focus their limited resources on those NPOs 
                       which have been identified as higher risk; and 
                    c)  a “one size fits all” approach is not an effective way to combat terrorist abuse of NPOs and 
                       is more likely to disrupt or discourage legitimate charitable activities. 
             24.    Detailed registration procedures for NPOs, additional reporting requirements, requirement of 
             appointing a designated staff responsible for counter-terrorism compliance, and an external audit of 
             the organisation, may not be appropriate for CFT purposes for those NPOs facing little to no TF risk. 
             Any of these or other TF risk mitigation measures should be proportionate to the TF risk they face.   
             A.     OUTREACH TO THE SECTOR 
             25.    The Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 requires countries to undertake outreach to the 
                                                             15
             NPO sector concerning terrorist financing issues. Regular dialogue with the NPO sector leads to 
             and helps establish collaborative relationship with the sector. In practice, while there are various 
             forms of outreach, it could focus on the subset of organisations that fall within the FATF definition of 
             NPO and which are at higher risk of abuse. This can nevertheless be challenging if there is a large 
             number of diverse entities that comprise the sector. Engagingt wh NPi   O associations, coalitions, 
             umbrella organisations, self-regulatory organisations and donor organisations can also be a useful 
             way of effectively reaching out to a large number of NPOs.  
             26.    Another issue is identifying which part of the government should be the focal point for such 
             engagement. All stakeholders, including governmental andg nonovernment- al actors, law 
             enforcement and NPO regulators, can be involved in the development of outreach and education 
             about  the specific terrorist risks facing a domestic NPO sector and provide examples of risk 
             mitigation good practices. For countries with a single charities regulator, this could be a logical 
             choice of focal point for outreach. However, in many countries, NPO sand CFT authorities fall under 
             the jurisdiction of numerous government ministries and departments. In some countries, the tax 
             authorities have proven to be a good focal point for engagement since, as is often the case, a large 
             number of NPOs have regulare ngagement with the tax authorities in the context of qualifying for 
             and maintaining preferential tax treatment. 
                                                                   
             14
                   See also, for example, the Universal Declaration of Human R ig(Ahtrsticles 18, 19 and 20an) d 
             15    International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Articles 18. 19, 21 and 22).  
                   Paragraph 5(a) of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
             16                                                                                         2015  
                                          BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                             RECOMMENDATION 8 
               27.     Ideally, outreach should involve a twwoa-y, ongoing dialogue between governments and 
               NPOs. It can include guidance to NPOs and consultation with NPOs to seek their input or feedback. 
               Outreach to the sector could occur during the country’s domestic sector review; during the 
               development and implementation of risk mitigation measures and guidance; duringe F thATF 
               mutual evaluation process; and when specific issues are raised. The following are some of the 
               advantages of such an approach: 
                       a)  Countries may obtain useful information from NPOs in their country about their specific 
                           needs, concerns, vulnerabilities, risks and challenges. This information can be used to 
                           direct the development of more effective policies, guidance and risk mitigation measures 
                           for NPOs. 
                       b)  Issues and concerns flagged by NPOs may help countries prevent or disrupt- hriskig h
                           activities before they escalate to instances of terrorist abuse or lead to earlier detection of 
                           such abuse.  
                       c)  Risk mitigation measures may be implemented more effectively because NPOs will have a 
                           better understanding of their terrorist financing risks and how to best to mitigate them. 
                       d)  Countries may learn how to conduct more effective outreach to NPOs on terrorist 
                           financing and related issues and engage in more constructive, ongoing dialogue with the 
                           sector on protecting NPOs from terrorist abuse. 
               B.      SUPERVISION OR MONITORING OF NPOS 
               28.     The Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 requires countries to take steps to promote 
               effective supervision or monitoring of their “NPO sector”, meaning those organisations that fall 
               within the scope of theF ATF definition of NPOs and ultimately those NPOs that are the subset of 
               NPOs deemed to be at higher risk of TF abuse. 
               29.     Recommendation 8 does not require the same measures to be applied to all NPOs. Indeed, a 
               “one  size fits all” approach would not be consistent with Recom1me andndat pion roper 
               implementation of a r-ibasksed approach. Countries should implement measures that are 
               commensurate with the risks identified through their domestic review of the NPO sector and their 
               understanding of the TF risks facing the sector, and should apply enhanced measures where the TF 
               risks are higher. It is also possible that existing regulatory or other measures may already 
               sufficiently address the current TF risk to the NPOs in a jurisdiction, although TF risks to the sector 
               should be periodically reviewed. 
               30.     In practice, this means that countries should apply the specific measures set out- in sub
               paragraphs 5(b)(i) to 5(b)(vii) of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 to address the NPOs 
               falling within the FATF definition of NPOs and at greatest risk of TF abuse. In some jurisdictions, this 
               may mean 1) those NPOs that control a significant portion of the financial resources of the sec tor
               and 2) those NPOs that have a substantial share of the sector’s international activities. However, in 
               other jurisdictions, input from the domestic sector review and an understanding of the TF risks 
               facing the NPO sector,  may indicate that the risk is graeter for NPOs with different characteristics.  
               For example, a major finding of the typologies report was that NPOs most at high risk were those 
                2015                                                                                                        17 
                  BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                  RECOMMENDATION 8 
                  engaged in ‘service’ activities and operating in a close proximity to an active terrorist threat, 
                  whether domestically or internationally.  
                  31.      The specific measures that could be applied to those NPOs deemed at greater TF risk include 
                  requirements for those organisations to:  
                           a)  be licensed or registered. However, countries are not required to impose specific 
                                licensing or registration requirements for count-teerrrorist financing purposes. For 
                                example, in some countries NPOs are already registered with tax authorities and 
                                monitored in the context of qualifying for favourable tax teratment such as tax credits or 
                                tax exemptions16; 
                           b)  maintain information on their activities and those who own, control or direct their 
                                activities; 
                           c)  issue annual financial statements; 
                           d)  have controls in place to ensure that funds are fully accounted for and spen tin a manner 
                                consistent with the NPO’s stated activities; 
                           e)  follow a “know your beneficiaries and associate NPOs” rule; 
                           f)   keep records; and  
                           g)  be subject to monitoring by the appropriate authorities, including the application of 
                                effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions17 for violating these requirements. 
                  32.      There are some important advantages to properly implementing these aspects of the 
                  supervision and monitoring requirements: 
                           a)  Applying measures that are commensurate to the risks identified (rather than applying a 
                                “one size fits all” approach) avoids ove-regrulation of the sector which may place a 
                                disproportionate burden on NPOs that have not been identified as being at risk andor/ 
                                may inadvertently disrupt or discourage legitimate charitable activities.  
                           b)  Those NPOs at risk of TF abuse may change over time and therefore warrant a change in 
                                government regulatory, investigative or outreach response.  
                           c)  Countries may be able to help mitigate the terrorist financing risks by leveraging off of 
                                transparency, good governance and/or sel-fregulatory initiatives that are already being 
                                implemented by NPOs. 
                           d)  Countries can better allocate their limited supervisory resources by taking steps that ae r
                                commensurate (i.e. proportionate) to the specific risks that have been identified, rather 
                                than applying the full range of measures set out in sub-paragraphs 5(b)(i) to 5(b)(vii) to 
                                the numerous and diverse NPOs. 
                           e)  Different countries have adopted different approaches to the supervision and monitoring 
                                of NPOs based on a range of factors, including their domestic legal frameworks, 
                                                                        
                  16
                          Footnote 23 of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
                  17
                          Sanctions for violations should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive, and in line with or at least 
                          not surpassing sanctions for violations in other industries or sectors. 
                  18                                                                                                                           2015  
                                    BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
                       investigative expertise, assessment of domestic terrorist financing risks, and other 
                       considerations. There is not a single correc atpproach to ensuring effective oversight of 
                       the sector and appropriate transparency within NPOs, as long as the relevant sections of 
                       the NPO sector most at risk for TF abuse are appropriately monitored and have 
                       appropriate controls in place to mitigate such risks. Government authorities should have 
                       the ability to take action when TF threats are identified. 
             C.     EFFECTIVE INVESTIGATION AND INFORMATION GATHERING 
             33.    In the context of information gathering, countries should ensure effective cooperation, 
             coordination and information sharing to the extent possible among all levels of appropriate 
             authorities (meaning competent authorities, including law enforcement, intelligence and regulatory 
             agencies, accrediting institutions and se-lfregulatory organisations) or organisations that hold 
                                           18
             relevant information on NPOs. In practice, this may include, to the extent possible and where 
             appropriate, nongov-ernmental authorities such as NPO associations, coalitions, umbrella 
             organisations or NPO self-regulatory organisations. Such bodies may hold relevant information on 
             NPOs operating in the country and the specific terrorist financing risks that they are facing.  
             34.    Countries should have investigative expertise and capability to examine those NPOs which 
             are suspected of being exploited by, or actively supporting, terrorist organisations. Countries should 
             also ensure that full access to information on the administration and management of a particular 
             NPO (including financial and programmatic information) may be obtained during the cours ofe  an 
             investigation19
                            . In practice, this means that countries should ensure that designated law 
             enforcement authorities have responsibility for terrorist financing investigations within the 
             framework of national AML/CFT policies and have sufficient powers to do so, in line with 
             Recommendations 29, 30 and 31. Additionally, countries should ensure that all NPOs falling within 
             the FATF definition and deemed at higher risk of TF abuse as part of the subset of NPOs are required 
             to maintain, at a minimum, some financial and programmatic information, so that such information 
             may be obtained should an investigation into possible terrorist abuse arise. Such requirements 
             could be imposed through AML/CFT legislation or may already be in place in other types of 
             legislation. For example, NPOs may be required by law or regulation to maintain some financial and 
             programmatic information for the purpose of establishing that they qualify for favourable tax 
             treatment.  
             35.    Countries should establish appropriate mechanisms to ensure that, when there is suspicion 
             that a particular NPO is being abused by terrorists, this information and any other relevant 
             information are promptly shared with relevant competent authorities, in order to take preventive or 
                                 20
             investigative action . This does not mean that the FATF Recommendations require countries to 
             impose a suspicious transaction reporting obligation on NPOs, along the lines of 
             Recommendation 20. NPOs are not considered designated nonf-inancial businesses and professions 
             (DNFBPs) and should therefore not be subject to the FATF requirements for DNFBPs.  
                                                                   
             18
                   Paragraph 5(c)(i)  of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
             19
                   Paragraph 5(c)(ii) and 5(c)(iii) of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
             20
                   Paragraph 5(c)(iv) of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
              2015                                                                                        19 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
               36.     Some practices which have been found to enhance countries’ ability to identify and take 
               action against terrorist abuse of NPOs include: 
                       a)  effective interagency collaboration or a “whole-of-government” approach; 
                       b)  considering multiple types of information from different sources which facilitates the 
                           detection of abuse (including taking into account NPO regulatory information, open-
                           source information, financial intelligence unit and other financial information, national 
                           security information, law enforcement information and information from foreign 
                           authorities); and   
                       c)  fostering an environment of trust in which information on particular NPOs of concern for 
                           TF or related issues is made available to government authorities from the public and from 
                           the NPO sector itself. 
               37.     Information provided by NPOs to regulatory agencies who have, as part of their mandate, the 
               oversight of the NPO sector, is very important to promoting transparency in the NPO sector. 
               However, in cases where complicit organisations relied on deception to mislead donors and other 
               NPOs for terrorist financing purposes, the use of national security or i-gatntheerlligeden  ce
               information to breach this deception is important in protecting the sector from specific terrorist 
               financing threats. National security intelligence derives from varying sources and reports on a wide-
               range of subject matters. As demonstrated in the FATF typologies report, national security 
               intelligence provides context to the risk environment in which NPOs operate. This includes 
               information on individuals and organisations with relevant links tano dT F other  support for 
               terrorist activities. 
               38.     Information deriving from law enforcement activity and intelligence services can also be 
               helpful in identifying terrorist abuse in the NPO sector.  Information from crimli inanvestigations 
               can help provide competent authorities with a better understanding of the TF risk environment in 
               which NPOs are operating, and context surrounding instances of abuse and circumstances of risk. It 
               can provide insight on individuals and organisations supporting illicit activities and linked to NPOs, 
               and their relevant links to TF. 
               39.     The case studies in the FATF typologies report showed that, following the detection of abuse 
               or substantial risk in the NPO sector, and depending on the severity of the case, a variety of means 
               resulted in disruption or mitigation. In instances where a criminal threshold had already been 
               crossed, criminal prosecutions were relied on to halt TF abuse.  
               40.     The use of administrative means and targeted financial sanctions to protect the NPO sector 
               from terrorist abuse are also available, including applying sanctions against individuals associated 
               with misuse of NPOs or entire NPOs for supporting terrorist organisations or terrorist activity. FATF 
               Recommendation 6 supports the use of targeted sanctions to prevent TF, which are also 
               internationally anchored in United Nations Security Council Resolutions, particularly Resolutions 
               1267/1989, 1988, and 1373 and their successor resolutions. 
               41.     There may be other measures that could be implemented for specific organisations identified 
               as potentially a concern for TF without affecting the larger operations of the NPO sector. Such 
               examples are provided in Annex 1.   
               20                                                                                                        2015  
                                     BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
             42.    A collaborative, inte-ragency approach to the detection of abuse and risk ensures that 
             investigative actions being carried out by one body don’t conflict with or jeopardize actions being 
             carried out by another. 
             D.      EFFECTIVE CAPACITY TO RESPOND TO INTERNATIONAL REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION 
                     ABOUT AN NPO OF CONCERN 
             43.    Countries should identify appropriate points of contact and procedures to respond to 
             international requests for information regarding particular NPOs suspected of terrorist financing or 
             other forms of terrorist support21. 
             44.     International cooperation is important in protecting NPOs from trreorist abuse given that 
             their work is often global in nature and may span several jurisdictions. This global presence 
             provides a framework for national and international operations and financial transactions, often 
             within or near those areas that are most exposed to terrorist activity.   
             45.    Information from foreign counterparts can also be helpful in identifying and taking action 
             against TF threats because of the transnational nature of many NPO operations. Such information 
             may be obtained from NPOs’ foreign partners as well as information from foreign partner 
             (government) agencies.  
              
                                                                   
             21
                   Paragraph 5(d) of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 8 (FATF, 2012). 
              2015                                                                                         21 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
               IV.           ACTIONS NPOS CAN TAKE TO PROTECT AGAINST TF ABUSE  
                                                                             Specific examples of good practice for NPOs 
                                                                             to prevent TF abuse, especially if they 
                                                                             operate in higher risk areas, can be found in 
                                                                             Annex 2. 
               46.     The FATF recognises the intent and efforts to date of the NPO community to promote 
               transparency within their operations and to prevent misuse of the sector, including preventing TF. 
               The NPO sector in many countries has representational and sel-fregulatory organisations that have 
               developed standards and initiatives to help individual organisations ensure accountability and 
               transparency in their operations. Se-lrfegulatory initiatives to enhance transparency and good 
               governance have the positive consequence of also mitigating some TF risks even though they may 
               not have been specifically developed for that purpose. 
               A.      RISK ANALYSIS AND RISK-BASED APPROACH  
               47.     Most NPOs have good relations with thei rdonors, partner organisations and beneficiaries 
               who give to or work with the organisation in good faith. However, practical risks do exist and NPOs 
               can be abused for terrorist financing purposes. 
               48.     The nature of the risk in the particular circumstances, the activities that the NPO carries out, 
               and how and where the activities are undertaken, are all reasons why it is important for NPOs to 
               understand the TF risks they face and take appropriate measures to mitigate these risk. Many NPOs 
               already undertake their own risk analysis before working in a new environment or with new 
               partners, as several examples in  Annex 2 demonstrate. Such internal NPO risk assessments can 
               help mitigate a wide variety of potential risks faced by the NPO, including terrorist abuse. 
               B.      MITIGATING THE RISK 
               49.     The best approach for NPOs to ensure that they are not abused for terrorist purposes is to put 
               in place good governance and strong financial management, including having robust internal and 
               financial controls and risk management procedures. In addition, carrying out proper due diligence 
               on those individuals and organisations that give money to, receive money from or work closely with 
               the NPO is also important. Proper due diligence is dependent upon the circumstances and context of 
               each organisation and the environment in which it operates.  
               50.     Due diligence is the range of practical steps that need to be taken by NPOs so that they are 
               reasonably assured of the provenance of the funds given to the NPO; confident that they know the 
               people and organisations the NPO works with; and able to identify and manage associated risks. 
               NPOs may also undertake their own internal risk analysis to help better understand the risks they 
               face in their operations and design appropriate risk mitigation and due diligence measures. 
               22                                                                                                        2015  
                                          BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                             RECOMMENDATION 8 
               51.     For those NPOs deemed at higher risk of TF abuse, the risk mitigation measures that an 
               individual NPO should implement depend on a range of factors, including various aspects of the 
               NPO’s work and the associated risks, existing due diligence and risk mitigation measures, whether 
               the NPO works with partners and whether those partners operate in a close proximity to an active 
               terrorist threat.              Box 3. Example of a risk analysis by an NPO 
                     An international humanitarian aid organisation, which provides emergency relief in times 
                     of crisis as well as lon-gterm recovery assistance, assesses the context and risks in each 
                     geographical area where it operates or plans to operate. As part of this analysis, the 
                     organisation conducts a review of the security context and an analysis of political 
                     authorities and informal power structures in the area. It then determines the potential 
                     risks to programme staff or resources, including the risk of resource diversion. In areas 
                     without a formal government structure in place, the organisation assesses the role of local 
                     clan structures in the area’s administration, whether they are distinct from any extremist 
                     elements, and whether they can guarantee nonint- erference by extremist elements and 
                     prohibited parties in beneficiary selection, aid distribution, and related programme 
                     implementation. The organisation does not work in areas where clan or government 
                     structures cannot provide this type of assurance, or where the security environment or 
                     risk of aid diversion is unmanageable. The security situation and local dynamics make 
                     some areas of the world inaccessible for the organisation. 
               C.      SELF-REGULATION 
               52.      The growing complexity in the global environment has placed new demands on all legitimate 
               international actors to safeguard the integrity and accountability of their operations. The NPO 
               sector has responded considerably to these demands by developing several different standards and 
               initiatives  to help individual organisations ensure accountability and transparency in their 
               operations (See Annex 3).   
               53.     The non-profit sector in many countries has representational a-regndula story elf
               organisations, which aer a unique resource that can play a role in the protection of the sector 
               against a range of abuses, including terrorist abuse. Such umbrella organisations are directly 
               interested in preserving the legitimacy and reputation of the NPOs and have long been engaged in 
               the development and promulgation of good practices for these organisations in a wide array of 
               functions. The NPO sector in various jurisdictions can further work to disseminate their experience 
               in their self-regulatory measures, provide training and build capacity in the sector (and in different 
               jurisdictions) to adopt such measures, and monitor and evaluate effectiveness and relevance of such 
               measures. As self-regulatory mechanisms in the NPO sector have continued to evolve in various 
               jurisdictions, NPOs without such mechanisms could also consider the development of their own or 
               additional self-regulatory mechanisms to strengthen internal controls and procedures, due diligence 
                2015                                                                                                        23 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
               and other measures to improve transparency of their operations and funding and to prevent 
               terrorist and other abuses. 
               54.     Measures to strengthen effective NPO se-lfregulation should be encouraged as a significant 
               component of decreasing the risk of misuse by terrorist groups in addition to promoting greater 
               transparency and good governance within the larger NPO sector.  
                                                 Box 4. Example of NPO self-regulation 
                     The following  a  erexamples of initiatives by representational a-ndreg sulaetlofry 
                     organisations that can help NPOs ensure accountability and transparency. 
                                 An independent monitoring organisation, whose aim is to increase public 
                                   confidence in the country’s NPOs and help donors take responsible decisions, 
                                   developed a report on Standards of Transparency and Best Practices. The 
                                   report took into account domestic legislation, the specific characteristics of 
                                   the non-profit sector, and responses to a survey of representatives of the non-
                                   profit sector. The Standards, which are used to assess compliance by the NPO 
                                   sector, are structured in blocks, most of which are relevant to countering 
                                   terrorist abuse of NPOs, including:  
                                   o    The running and regulation of the governing board; 
                                   o    The clarity and publicity of the organisation's mission; 
                                   o    The planning and monitoring of activities; 
                                   o    Communication and truthfulness of the information provided; 
                                   o    Transparency of funding; 
                                   o    Plurality of funding; 
                                   o    Control over spending of the funds; 
                                   o    Annual reporting and compliance with legal requirements; and 
                                   o    Promotion of volunteering.  
                                 An umbrella organisation has implemented a program which awards 
                                   accreditation to NPOs that implement policies and procedures which uphold 
                                   the standards relating to governing bodies, financial accountability and 
                                   transparency, fundraising, staff management and volunteer involvement. The 
                                   process of applying for and maintaining good standing in the program 
                                   encourages NPOs to regularly review and improve the systems and policies 
                                   that they have in place. 1 
                                 An international umbrella organisation has taken steps to protect the NPO 
                                   sector against abuses such as fraud, by setting standards and responsibilities 
                                   for member NPOs related to governing bodies, public benefit goals, finances, 
                                   fundraising practices and transparency to the public. These are enforced 
               24                                                                                                        2015  
                                    BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
                              through an independent monitoring process that awards accreditation to 
                              member NPOs that meet the standards and blacklists those deemed to lack 
                              transparency. 
                             Several leading international NPOs have developed and committed to abide 
                              by a charter that promotes transparency and accountability in the areas of 
                              political and financial independence, responsible advocacy, participatory and 
                              effective programmes, transparency in reporting, accuracy of information, 
                              good governance and professional and ethical fundraising. Member NPOs 
                              commit themselves to applying the provisions of the charter to all their 
                              programmes, conducting annual independent fiscal audits, and submitting 
                              annual compliance reports, which are reviewed by an independent panel 
                                                                          2
                              whose assessment is made publicly available.   
                  Notes:  
                  1.  Imagine Canada, “Standards Program  ”(www.imaginecanada.ca/our-programs/standards-
                       program). 
                  2.  INGO Accountability Charter (2014)  (www.ingoaccountabilitycharter.org/home/what-is-the-
                       charter/). 
             D.     HOW GOOD GOVERNANCE PRACTICES BY NPOS HELP MEET R.8 OBJECTIVES 
             55.     Many NPOs already implement a wide variety of good governance and risk mitigation 
             measures, which can also help mitigate terrorist abuse.  The case studies analysed in support of the 
             typologies report demonstrated that terrorist abuse of the NPO sector was commonly the result of a 
             lack of robust internal governance and/or appropriate external oversight.  
             56.    For the subset of NPOs that fall within the FATF definition of NPO and are deemed at higher 
             risk of TF abuse, an effective approach for NPOs to protect themselves from terrorist abuse is the 
             by-product of having robust internal good governance practices in place. For example, while not 
             specifically designed with terrorist financing issues in mind, Transparencyrn Iatinotneal has 
             developed a handbook of good practices on Preventing Corruption in Humanitarian Operation. s
             Many of the good practices in the handbook may be helpful in the context of safeguarding 
             organisations against terrorist abuse.22 
                                                                   
             22
                 Transparency International (2015).  
              2015                                                                                        25 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
               57.     Good governance can be grouped into four categories.  
                                                    Box 5. Good governance for NPOs 
                     Robust internal governance practices for NPOs can be grouped into the following four 
                     categories:  
                         1)  Organisational integrity; 
                         2)  Partner relationships; 
                         3)  Financial transparency and accountability; and 
                         4)  Programme planning and monitoring. 
                
               58.     Some characteristics of a good governance system for NPOs are described be lowMa.ny of 
               these controls to promote good governance, which are often initially implemented for other 
               purposes or to prevent other illicit activity, can also have an important role in preventing TF abuse. 
               1)      Organisational integrity 
               59.     NPOs are established and operate in accordance with a governing document, for example, 
               articles of incorporation, a constitution, or bylaws that outline purposes, structure, reporting 
               practices, and guidelines for complying with local laws. Members of the governing board understand 
               and act in the interest of the organisation. The governing board maintains oversight over the 
               organisation by establishing strong financial and human resource polices, meeting on a regular 
               basis, and actively monitoring activities. 
               2)      Partner relationships 
               60.     To prevent the abuse of funds by partners, NPOs carry out appropriate due diligence on those 
               individuals and organisations that the NPO receives donations from, gives money to or works with 
               closely before entering into relationships or agreements. NPOs verify partner reputations through 
               the use of selection criteria and searches of publicly available information, including domestic and 
               UN sanctions lists. Written agreements can also be used to outline the expectations and 
               responsibilities of both parties, which include detailed information as to the application of funds and 
               requirements for regular reporting, audits and on-site visits. 
               3)      Financial accountability and transparency  
               61.     NPOs prevent financial abuse and misuse of resources and funds by establishing strong 
               financial controls and procedures. For example, the governing board approves an annual budget and 
               have a process in place to monitor the use of funds. NPOs keep adequate and complete financial 
               records of income, expenses, and financial transactions throughout their operations, including the 
               end use of the funds. NPOs clearly state programme goals when collecting funds, and ensure that 
               funds are applied as intended. Information about the activities carried out is made publicly 
               26                                                                                                        2015  
                                           BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
                available. NPOs are informed as to the sources of their income and establish criteria to determine 
                whether donations should be accepted of refused.  
                4)     Programme planning and monitoring 
                62.    NPOs establish internal controls and monitoring systems to ensure that funds and services 
                are being used as intended. For example, NPOs clearly define the purpose and scope of their 
                activities, identify beneficiary groups, and consider the risks of terrorist financing and risk 
                mitigation measures before undertaking projects. They maintain detailed budgets for each project 
                and generate regular reports on related purchases and expenses. NPOs establish procedures to trace 
                funds, services, and equipment, and carry out transactions through the banking system when 
                possible to maintain transparency of funds and mitigate the risk of terrorist financing. Project 
                performance is monitored on a regular basis by verifying the existence of beneficiaries and ensuring 
                the receipt of funds. NPOs take appropriate measures, based on the risks, to account for funds and 
                services delivered. 
                63.    Although many of the measures noted above may primarily be aimed at combatting fraud, tax 
                evasion, embezzlement, money laundering, and other financial crimes in the NPO sector, they can 
                also help mitigate terrorist abuse by enhancing the transparency and integrity of the NPO sectorn  i
                its operations and flow of funds. The same can be said of government initiatives to enhance 
                transparency and integrity of the NPO sector, even if they are not primarily aimed at combatting 
                terrorist abuse of the NPOs.  
                 2015                                                                                                        27 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
             V.           ACCESS OF NPOS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES  
             64.    The FATF recognises the importance of ensuring that implementation of its 
             Recommendations does not adversely and disproportionately affect NPOs. NPOs rely on banking 
             facilities and other financial services to carry out important humanitarian and charitable services. 
             However, in recent years, there have been some reports of financial institutions terminating or 
             restricting the access of legitimate NPOs to financial services, or taking longer to process 
             transactions of NPOs. The wholesale termination of individual customers or entire classes of 
             customer, without taking into account their level of risk or risk mitigation measures is not a proper 
             implementation of a ris-kbased approach ands i not consistent with the FATtF Sandards. Such 
             practice has the potential to drive financial flows underground, thus reducing financial transparency 
             and the ability to identify and take action against TF abuses. Termination and closing of NPO’s bank 
             account also inhibits the delivery of aid to developing countries and crisis zones where 
             humanitarian needs are acute and where charitable work contributes positively to the fight against 
             regional and global terrorism. Financial institutions should terminate or not establish customer 
             relationships, on a casbye--case basis, where the money laundering and terrorist financing risks 
             cannot be mitigated23.  
             65.    This section of the paper is aimed at clarifying: 
                    a)  how proper application of a risbk-ased approach by countries and financial institutions 
                        may facilitate access of legitimate NPOs to financial services; and 
                    b)  what steps NPOs may take to facilitate their own access to financial services.  
             66.    NPOs that handle funds shouldma   intain registered bank accounts, keep their funds in them, 
             and utilise regulated channels for transferring funds, especially overseas transa ctWiohnes.re 
             feasible, NPOs should use regulated systems to conduct their financial transactions. Tish brings the 
             accounts of non-profit organisations, by and large ,within the regulated banking system and under 
             the relevant controls or regulations of that system.   
             67.     There may be circumstances in which cash may be the only means possible for the NPO to 
             operate, for example, to provide assistance to a particularly remote region where financial services 
             are not available. While cash is inherently more risky to terrorist abuse, when cash is used, it should 
             be used appropriately in line with international and national laws and regulations, including cash 
             declaration and/or cash disclosure requirements to promote greater transparency and 
             accountability of the funds.  
             68.    Financial institutions should also not view all NPOs as high risk. Most NPOs (using that term 
             in the broader sense, beyond the subset of NPOs as that term is defined by FATF) may face little, if 
             any, risk of terrorist financing abuse .For example, financial institutions should not view NPO (sas 
             that term is defined by FATF) as high risk simply because they may operate in cash-intensive 
             environments or in countries of great humanitarian need.  
                                                                   
             23
                   Recommendation 10 (FATF, 2012). 
             28                                                                                          2015  
                                    BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                              RECOMMENDATION 8 
             69.    When considering the potential risks posed by any customer (including one which is an NPO), 
             financial institutions should take appropriate steps to identify and assess their money laundering, 
             terrorist financing risks (for customers, countries or geographic areas; and products, services, 
             transactions or delivery channels), and risk mitigation measures being applied by the NPO. Financial 
             institutions should also be required to have policies, controls and procedures that enable them to 
             effectively manage and mitigate the risks that have been identified (either by the country or by the 
                                 24
             financial institution) . In practice, when assessing the potential risk of a particular NPO, financial 
             institutions should take into account: 
                    a)  any measures that the NPO itself may have in place to mitigate risk; and 
                    b)  any regulatory requirements that may apply to the NPO, including those which are not 
                       specifically aimed at AML/CFT, but which nevertheless help to mitigate terrorist 
                       financing risk, such as good governance, due diligence measures and reporting 
                       requirements on its activities for tax or other purposes. 
             70.    In practice, if after conducting a risk assessment, a specific risk has been identified in relation 
             to a particular NPO, the financial institution should first assess whether that risk can be sufficiently 
             mitigated by proper safeguards and measures so as to allow legitimate charitable activities to 
             continue. Such measures could include: the mandatory use of consent regimes for particular 
             transactions; excluding certain types of transactions; agreeing to approved routes for transmission 
             of transactions. 
             71.    It is good practice for countries to work with their financial sector and supervisory 
             authorities to foster a mutual understanding of what constitutes appropriate implementation of a 
             risk-based approach and work towards facilitating financial inclusion objectives. When doing so, 
             countries should have regard to the FATF Risk-Based Approach Guidance for the Banking Sector and 
             the FATF Revised Guidance on AML/CFT and Financial Inclusion. Additionally, the financial sector 
             could consider greater engagement with the NPO sector and/or its specific NPO customers to help 
             exchange views on the risks and work towards more effective risk mitigation measures acceptable 
             to all parties.  Box 6. Example of collaboration between financial and NPO sectors 
                  To ensure that aid being sent to civilians in need of assistance in and around Syria is used 
                  as intended and is in compliance with UK, EU and US sanctions, the British Bankers’ 
                  Associations and the UK’s Disasters Emergency Committee, an NPO umbrella 
                  organisation, collaborated to produce the following guidance for NPOs: 
                                        Provide banks with a one-page briefing on proposed programmes 
                                          in the sanctioned country. This should include intended 
                                          beneficiaries, how they are selected, the programme to be 
                                          delivered, who will deliver the programme (e.g. the agency itself, 
                                                                   
             24
                   Paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Interpretive Note to Recommendation 1 (FATF, 2012). 
              2015                                                                                        29 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                or its partner in country), and the procurement procedures for 
                                                purchases to be made in country. 
                                               Explain how due diligence on local partners is conducted – 
                                                including the frequency of screening, the sanctions lists used for 
                                                screening, and the criteria to be met prior to the commencement 
                                                of a relationship. 
                                               Consider the currency in which payments are to be effected, as 
                                                this will have an impact on the applicable sanctions legislation. 
                                               Provide banks with a detailed explanation of the purpose of each 
                                                transaction and include a contact number of a person at the 
                                                agency who is familiar with the transaction and can assist in 
                                                providing additional information if required. 
                                               Also provide the payment amount and currency, the name of the 
                                                local bank where the account is held, the name the account is 
                                                held in, the name of the local partner, a description of any links to 
                                                the local government or a sanctioned party, and details of any 
                                                specific or general licence which permits the transaction. 
                                               Engage with regulators to ensure actions are, if necessary, 
                                                covered by general or specific licences and make reference to any 
                                                licences in payment instructions. This will assist the bank in 
                                                ascertaining the legality of the payment and prevent potential 
                                                delays in processing. 
                                               Take responsibility for determining the legality of the payment. 
                                                Banks can advise on the applicable legislation and the agency 
                                                should then consult with its legal team prior to processing. 
                
               72.     For donors it is good practice to undertake reasonable steps to research publicly alavbalei  
               materials in order to ascertain how an NPO operates, how it is managed, the nature of its 
               programmes and where they operate. This is especially true for NPOs that operate in areas where 
               there is known risk of terrorist activity.  
               73.     In practice, the following may positively impact NPOs’ ability to access to financial services 
               both from financial institutions and from donors: 
                       a)  developing constructive working relationships with their financial institution; 
                       b)  engaging  in proactive dialogue with the financial institution, including proactive 
                           provision of the relevant documentation to the financial institution; 
                       c)  showing awareness of any terrorist financing risks to which the NPO might be reasonably 
                           perceived to be vulnerable;  
               30                                                                                                        2015  
                                                  BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                 RECOMMENDATION 8 
                           d)  demonstrating that the NPO has implemented measures to mitigate those TF risks, either 
                                to fulfil regulatory obligations, to fulfil the requirements imposed by their donors, or at 
                                their own initiative; 
                           e)  if potential problems arise, ascertaining wheth efrinancial institution’s concerns stem 
                                from a particular individual involved with the NPO, or from transactions in a particular 
                                country or region, and considering and discussing with the financial institution whether 
                                the NPO could take additional actions or already has sufficient risk mitigation measures 
                                in place; and 
                           f)   involving their umbrella organisations, serlfe-gulatory organisations and/or donors in 
                                this dialogue, as needed, to help clarify the risk situation and the risk mitigation measures 
                                that are in place. 
                   2015                                                                                                                            31 
         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
         RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                     ANNEX 1 
                                           
         EXAMPLES OF MEASURES THAT COUNTRIES HAVE IMPLEMENTED AND 
              WHICH MAY, DEPENDING ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES, HELP TO 
                                   MITIGATE RISK 
         1.  These are some examples of measures that have been implemented by countries and which 
         may, depending on the circumstances, help to mitigate TF risk. In practice, the unique circumstances 
         and context of each case will determine whether ap articular measure is a good practice that is 
         partially or fully mitigating the specific risk involved. The types of circumstances and context which 
         are relevant to such a determination and unique to each jurisdiction include: the level and type of TF 
         risk, the size and type of charitable funds or assets being distributed, the geographical context, and 
         existing measures in place by government authorities, among other considerations. 
         2.  These examples should not be use das a checklist or “gold standard” of measures to be 
         applied in all circumstances. A “one size fits all” approach would not be consistent with proper 
         implementation of a proportionate, risk-based approach, as called for by Recommendation 8.   
         3.  The examples are provided under the following four elements: 
                       Box 7. Effective approach to protecting the NPO sector 
           An effective approach to protecting the NPO sector involves varying degrees of the folwloing 
           four elements depending on the circumstances, TF risks, existing laws and domestic legal 
           framework, and other considerations for each jurisdiction: 
             1)  Ongoing outreach to the sector; 
             2)  Proportionate, risk-based supervision or monitoring; 
             3)  Effective investigation and information gathering; and 
             4)  Effective mechanisms for international cooperation. 
          
         32                                                           2015  
                                 BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                      RECOMMENDATION 8 
            OUTREACH TO THE SECTOR  
                                                   Box 8. Spain 
               Spain’s Tesoro Publico (Treasury), under the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, led 
               the development of a best practices and recommendations paper onComb  ating money 
                                                                             1
               laundering and terrorist financing: Npornof- it organisations sector. The paper, which is 
               published on the government’s website, was developed in consultation with the authorities 
               that have supervisory powers over NPOs, organisations representing the sector, and NPOs. It is 
               meant to assist directing officials in meeting their obligations to ensure that NPOs are not used 
               to channel funds and resources to persons or entities linkererodr tist go troups or 
               organisations. The paper recognises that the need to apply such measures is dependent on the 
               risks faced by each NPO, and emphasises the need for NPOs to analyse and evaluate the risks 
               inherent in various activities in order to determi newhich projects carry higher risks. The 
               paper discusses how NPOs can strengthen overall oversight in the following three areas in 
               order to protect both integrity and reputation: 
                                   Functioning of directing bodies. The paper emphasises the need to 
                                    implement measures that ensure the ethical and professional 
                                    suitability of directing officials and key employees, and recommends 
                                    that NPOs establish rules on the powers vested in directing bodies and 
                                    clearly define duties and procedures by which resolutions are adopted. 
                                    Ensuring that directing officials act in the best interest of the NPO and 
                                    that directing bodies are accountable and transparent can help 
                                    prevent the infiltration of individuals that may abuse NPOs for 
                                    multiple purposes, including terrorism and terrorist financing.  
                                   Planning and technical monitoring of activities. NPOs can use planning 
                                    and monitoring to prevent the misappropriation of funds for terrorist 
                                    financing or other criminal activities. The paper recommends that 
                                    NPOs clearly define their purposes and beneficiaries, and refrain from 
                                    carrying on any activity not designated to attain those purposes. 
                                    Understanding where risks exist, setting clear guidelines for the 
                                    delivery of activities and monitoring those activities on a regular basis 
                                    can help NPOs ensure that resources are being used as intended. 
                                   Financial transparency. NPOs should ensure financial transparency 
                                    and accountability. Strong financial controls to track and monitor the 
                                    source and use of funds can assist NPOs in preventing and mitigating 
                                    the misuse of resources for terrorist activities. 
               1. While this document pertains to both money laundering and terrorist financing, it is referenced in this 
               report for terrorist financing purposes. 
             2015                                                                                33 
                          BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                          RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                                                              Box 9. France 
                               The French Treasury publishes on its website a guide of good conduct for the associations with 
                               regards to the terrorist financing risk to which they are exposed. This document intends , in
                               particular with regard to Recommendation 8 of the FATF, to warn the associations and their 
                               managers to this specific risk, to improve their diligences measures, and to help them to put in 
                               place adequate internal policies, procedures and controls to this end. This guide explains the 
                               recommendation 8 of the FATF and the expected measures of the FATF (awareness, control 
                               and monitoring of the sector, effective collect of information and investigations, capacity to 
                               answer to foreign requests on NPOs). It also exposes the national and European regulation and 
                               devices on terrorist financing in particular on assets freezing; the risk assessment on the 
                               threat; legal requirements related to the financing including donations; expectations for good 
                               financial management; requirements for the nomination of the managers, and legal provisions 
                               concerning associations.   
                               The French financial intelligence unit (FIU) Tracfin published in its annual activity report and 
                               on the website of the Ministry of Finances a typology case and some warning criteria and 
                               indices focused on the misuse of associations for terrorist financing such as : association's bank 
                               account financed only by cash payments; use of the association's bank account as a transit 
                               account and absence of real activity of the association; credit flows to a personal’s bank 
                               account from the association’s bank account ; environmentally "sensitive" around the 
                               association; relatively small financial flows, to link with the sensitive environment. 
                                                                                                   Box 10. United Kingdom 
                               The Charity Commission of England and Wales has established a small outreach team to raise 
                               awareness on issues such as fraud and abuse, including abuse by terrorist organisations, 
                               within several key charity sectors. The aim of the team is to provide effective and thorough 
                               engagement with stakeholders to enable charities (NPOs) to protect themselves from abuse. 
                               The outreach team focuses on charities working in areas of highest risk by running events for 
                               charities working in Syria, speaking at third party events, publicising existing guidance, and 
                               creating new guidance as issues develop. 
                               The outreach team also issues “alerts” on key issues such as due diligence on partner agencies, 
                               monitoring, sending funds internationally, counter terrorism legislation and requirements ,aid 
                               convoys and sending staff and volunteers. 
                               In addition, the Charity Commission has published literature and posted information on its 
                               website on giving safely to Syria. This includes advice to make donations to registered charities 
                               that have experience providing humanitarian assistance in high risk, insecure and dangerous 
                               environments and which have ongoing relief operations in Syria and/or surrounding countries.  
                          34                                                                                                                                                                                     2015  
                                 BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                      RECOMMENDATION 8 
               The Charity Commission has also worked in collaboration with umbrella organisations and 
               sector leaders to develop an online toolkit to help charities establish good standards of 
               governance and accountability to safeguard themselves from terrorism, fraud and other forms 
               of abuse. The toolkit includes guidance on how terrorism legislation applies to charities, how 
               to deal with individuals and partners on designation lists, both domestically and 
               internationally, and the impact of extremism and radicalisation abuse. It also includes practical 
               examples and tools, such as template partnership agreements, checklists and case studies. 
                                         Box 11. United States of America 
               The United States engages in sustained dialogue with the US NPO sector, including charities, 
               donors, and specific communities, such as the Muslim-American community,  Somalia-
               American community, and the Syrian American community, among others.  The US participates 
               in community outreach events around the country to meet with community leaders and 
               members on a regular basis.  The US also provides a number of guidance materials, such as the 
               US  Department of the Treasury’s website related to protecting the charitable sector from 
                            1
               terrorist abuse .  
               These existing publications include an Office of Foreign Assets Control(O FAC) risk matrix, 
               voluntary Guidelines, charity FAQs, testimony related to protecting the charitable sector from 
               abuse, domestic sanctions against charities, and international publications on the TF threat and 
               risk mitigation best practices.  Periodic review of these publications and consultation with the 
               US charitable sector may also lead to updates to these documents over time.  
                                                            2                                    3
               The US Treasury’s matrix of common risk factor sand Anti-Terrorist Financing Guidelines, 
               among other voluntary guidance for the U Snon-profit sector, were developed to assist U  S
               charities in identifying the level of risk for some of their activities and adopting an effective 
               risk-based approach that can be used when disbursing funds or resources in high risk areas. 
               The risk matrix and Guidelines were designed to provide NPOs with an understanding of the 
               risks that they should consider in the course of conducting their due diligence and some 
               examples of risk mitigation best practices. These guidance documents are intended to be 
               helpful  tools for charities to consider using when developing an appropriate compliance 
               program, particularly those charities that conduct overseas charitable activity in higher risk 
               regions. The matrix is not a comprehensive list of risk factors indicating abuse or exploitation 
               of a particular charity or its operations, nor is it meant to establish whether or not a charity or 
               grantee/recipient is engaged in illicit activities.  The Guidelines are voluntary 
               recommendations for the charitable sector to consider in adopting practices that may better 
               protect it from the risk of abuse or exploitation by terrorist organisations. 
               Notes 
               1. www.treasury.gov/resource-center/terrorist-illicit-finance/Pages/protecting-index.aspx     
               2. www.treasury.gov/resource-center/terrorist-illicit-finance/Documents/charity_risk_matrix.pdf 
               3. www.treasury.gov/resource-center/terrorist-illicit-finance/Pages/protecting-charities-intro.aspx 
             2015                                                                                35 
        BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
        RECOMMENDATION 8 
                              Box 12. Canada 
         The national regulator of registered charities in Canada, thea Cnada Revenue Agency (CRA), 
         provides information on its website to assist charities in meeting the legislative and regulatory 
         obligations. It advises charities to develop and implement sound internal governance and 
         accountability procedures, financial controls, risk management systems, and transparent 
         reporting, in order to protect themselves against actual or alleged abuse of any kind, including 
         allegations of fraud, money laundering, or support for terrorism. The CRA has posted the 
         following checklist to its website to help charities identify vulnerabilities to terrorist abuse.  
                     Do you know about the individuals and entities associated with 
                      terrorism, which are listed in Canada under the United Nations Act and 
                      the Criminal Code? Are you aware of the Criminal Code and the 
                      Charities Registration (Security Information) Act provisions on 
                      financing and supporting terrorism—and the consequences of 
                      breaching the provisions? 
                     Do you have a good understanding of the background and affiliations 
                      of your board members, employees, fundraisers, and volunteers? 
                     Have you read the CRA guidance about keeping adequate books and 
                      records, activities, engaging in allowable activities, operating outside 
                      Canada, and charities in the international context? 
                     Do you have appropriate, sound, internal financial and other oversight 
                      and verification controls—for example, appropriate delegations and 
                      separations of authority over the collection, handling, and depositing 
                      of cash and the issuing of receipts? 
                     Do you transfer money using normal banking mechanisms, wherever 
                      possible? When it is not, do you use reputable alternative systems, and 
                      have strong additional controls and audit trails to protect your 
                      charity's funds and show how and when they were used? 
                     Do you know who uses your facilities and for what purpose—for 
                      example, your office or meeting space, name, bank account, credit 
                      cards, website, computer system, telephone or fax—what they are 
                      saying, and what materials they are distributing or leaving behind? 
                     Do you try to find out who else might be supporting a person or cause 
                      that you are endorsing in public statements, and who uses your name 
                      as a supporter? 
                     Do you know where your donations and other support really come 
                      from? 
                     Do you know who has ultimate control over the project that your 
                      charity's money and resources are benefiting, and what the money and 
        36                                                2015  
                  BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                               RECOMMENDATION 8 
                   resources are used for, including after the particular project is 
                   finished? 
                   Do you know your partners in delivering the work you are doing, and 
                   their affiliations to other organisations? 
                   Do you have clear written agreements with agents/contractors/other 
                   partners, in Canada and abroad, covering what activities will be 
                   undertaken and how they will be monitored and accounted for? Do 
                   you check that the agreements are being followed? 
        
        2015                                        37 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
             SUPERVISION OR MONITORING 
                                                      Box 13. Norway 
                Norwegian NPOs active in higher risk areas generally receive part of their funding from the 
                Norwegian government. As a result, they are subject to a number of supervisory measures, 
                including the requirement to register, report on the use of funds, provide statements of income 
                and expenditure, and ensure that they know their beneficiaries and associated NPOs. These 
                measures, which are aimed at uncovering fraud, corruption and terrorist financing, also apply 
                to foreign NPOs receiving funds. 
                The Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) and the Ministry of Foreign 
                Affairs’ Foreign Service Control Unit (FSCU) monitor the use of international development 
                assistance to prevent and detect irregularities and crime, including terrorist financing. This is 
                done through various means, including audit reports and spot-checks of projects and funding 
                recipients.  The FSCU and Norad conduct investigations when required and may share 
                information with the financial intelligence unit (FIU) and the Police Security Service, where 
                appropriate. 
                NPOs are also required to register in order to open a bank account. In addition, Norway 
                encourages voluntary registration of NPOs by providing incentives such as preferential 
                taxation treatment. 
                                                     Box 14. Isle of Man 
                The Isle of Man had previously made several attempts to implement a registration and 
                oversight regime for AML/CFT compliance across the entire NPO sector. Through 
                consultations with the sector, it was able to propose an approach that would narrow the focus 
                of the regime to only those NPOs considered to be at greatest risk of terrorist financing, rather 
                than the NPO sector in its entirety.  
                The Isle of Man developed the Specified NonP-rofit Organisation (SNPO) designation for NPOs 
                that would be subject to the registration and oversight regime. Criteria for the designation 
                were based on the FATF definition of NPO and several factors related to the risk of terrorist 
                financing.1 By narrowing its focus to the areas of the sector that are of greatest concern, the Isle 
                of Man will be able to make efficient use of its efforts and resources while protecting low risk 
                NPOs from the unnecessary burden associated with meeting the requirements of the 
                registration and oversight regime.   
                1 A Specified Non-Profit Organisation (“SNPO”) is defined as: “a body corporate or other legal person, 
                trustees of a trust, partnership, other association or organisation and any equivalent or similar structure 
                or arrangement, established solely or primaryil to raise or distribute funds for charitable, religious, 
                cultural, educational, political, social or fraternal purposes with the intention of benefiting the public or 
             38                                                                                          2015  
                                                                      BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                    RECOMMENDATION 8 
                              a section of the public and which has- 
                                   i.       an annual or anticipated annual income of GBP 5 000 or more; and 
                                  ii.       remitted, or is anticipated to remit, at least 30% of its income in any one year to one or more 
                                            ultimate recipients in or from one or more higher risk jurisdictions;” 
                              The concept of “other good works” as referenced in the FATF’s definition of NPO is not included in the 
                              definition of the designation on the basis that it is too vague to be realistically ecnefaobler                                                               in primary 
                              legislation. It should be noted this draft has not entered law at the time of writing and may be subject to 
                              minor amendment. 
                                                                                                        Box 15. Canada 
                              Many registered charities in Canada fall within the scope of the FATF’s definition of NPO and 
                              are considered to be particularly vulnerable to terrorist abuse. In recognition of these inherent 
                              vulnerabilities, the national regulator of charities in Canada, the Canada Revenue Agency, has 
                              established a specialised division to support the government’s ant-iterrorism legislation, and 
                              to mitigate and manage the risks of terrorism as it pertains to registered c. Thhariitsie s
                              includes preventing organisations with connections to terrorism from obtaining charitable 
                              registration, which provides charities with preferential tax treatment, and detecting and 
                              revoking the registration when connections exist. 
                              The division uses a risk based approach in reviewing the activities of applicant and registered 
                              charities, and takes into consideration factors such as the location of operation and 
                              connections to entities with links to terrorism or terrorist financing. Reviews are conducted by 
                              senior intelligence analysts, researchers and auditors with specialised  training in terrorist 
                              financing, using open source information, classified intelligence from security partners, and 
                              information submitted by organisations themselves. If an applicant charity does not meet the 
                              requirements of registration for any reason, including connections to terrorism, its application 
                              will be denied. If a charity that is already registered does not comply with the requirements of 
                              registration, for any reason including connections to terrorism, the division can apply a range 
                              of regulatory interventions, including education letters, compliance agreements, monetary 
                              penalties and, in the most the serious cases, revocation of registration. If the division 
                              encounters information that is relevant to a terrorism investigation when carrying out these 
                              regulatory duties, it has the authority to share that information with national security partners 
                              and law enforcement agencies.   
                              Monitoring applicant and registered charities in order to prevent and disrupt organisats ion
                              with ties to terrorism assists the government in preventing the exploitation of charitable 
                              resources to support terrorism.    
                                         
                          2015                                                                                                                                                                                39 
                          BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                          RECOMMENDATION 8 
                          EFFECTIVE INVESTIGATION AND INFORMATION GATHERING  
                                                                                                           Box 16. Portugal 
                               Portugal introduced legislation creating the Permanent Liaison Group (PLG), which constitutes 
                               a forum for information sharing bewt een the Tax Authority and the financial intelligence unit 
                               (FIU). The Tax Authority, which also collaborates with laenfw orcement on tax crimes and 
                               related money laundering, may share a wide range of information with AML/CFT authorities 
                               through the PLG. This includes sharing relevant information, for TF prevention purposes, 
                               including information concerning NPOs for potiael tnt errorist abuse, such as donations 
                               received by NPOs, donations made by individuals to NPOs, and declarations concerning cros-s
                               border transfers made through the financial system to beneficiaries in tax havens. 
                                                                                           Box 17. United States of America 
                               The United States Government takes an interagency approach to detect, deter and disrupt 
                               cases of terrorist abuse within the NPO sector. Several agencies, each operating within the 
                               parameters of its own authorities, work together to analyse available data, threats and trends, 
                               and to determine an appropriate government response.  
                               The Department of Justice (DOJ), the principal government entity responsible for overseeing 
                               the investigation and prosecution of TF offenses at the federal level, u itsse as uthorities to 
                               investigate and dismantle terrorist financiers and thus deter future supporters.  To advance 
                               this mission and in recognition of the importance of tracking the financial underpinnings of 
                               terrorist activity, F-BTIFOS (Terrorist FinancingO perations Section) was established 
                               immediately after 11 September 2001 to identify and disrupt all TF activities.- FTFBOIS is 
                               charged with managing FBI’s investigative efforts into TF facilitators and ensuring financial 
                               investigative techniques are used, ewhre appropriate, in FBI cou-nttererrorism (CT) 
                               investigations.  FB-ITFOS works in close coordination with the National Joint Terrorism Task 
                               Force (JTTF), which coordinates CT efforts of federal, state and local law enforcement agencies 
                               through local JTTFs.  In addition to FB-ITFOS, other DOJ components play a key role in TF 
                               investigations.  When an investigation produces sufficient evidence for a criminal prosecution, 
                               the US Attorneys’ Offices, working closely with the DOJ’s National Security, Criminal and Tax 
                               Divisions, leverage multiple federal criminal statutes to prosecute cases involving TF, including 
                               cases of charities that have been misused to support terrorist organisations.   
                               Agencies working closely with the Department of Justice and the law enfrocement community 
                               to identify and take action against TF threats in the NPO sector are the Internal Revenue 
                               Service (IRS), as the NPO regulator, as well as several offices of the Department of the 
                               Treasury, including the Office of Intelligence and Analy(OsiIsA ), the Financial Crimes 
                               Enforcement Network or FinCEN (the financial intelligence unit or FIU of the United States), 
                               the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), anda   policy office. In addition to identifying and 
                          40                                                                                                                                                                                     2015  
                                                                BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                     RECOMMENDATION 8 
                            responding to terrorist threats to the NPO sector, the various offices of the Treasury are also 
                            involved in and conducting outreach and international engagement on this issue. 
                            The IRS, a bureau within Treasury that administers and enforces US tax laws, can also play a 
                            supportive role in the US Government’s counter terrorist financing (CFT) efforts, in particular 
                            through the work of IRS Criminal Investigation (CI) division, which investigates criminal 
                            violations of US tax law, as well as money laundering and other financial crimes, and IRS T-ax
                            Exempt/Government Entities (TE/GE) division, which administers IRS laws and regulations 
                            related to tax-exempt organisations. When authorised to assist in a TF investigation, these IRS 
                            components can provide unique expertise and authorities to support US Government CFT 
                            efforts. The IRS analyses financial reporting violations as they pertain to filing requirements 
                            and tax compliance. This can lead to further investigations, which provide additional insight 
                            into underlying illicit actions, including terrorist financing.  
                            FinCEN establishes the United States AML/CFT regulatory requirements. FinCEN collects 
                            financial intelligence through suspicious transaction reporting, cash transaction reports, and 
                            other threshold-based declarations/disclosures from financial institutions and persons.  This 
                            financial intelligence can be used in conjunction with data obtained from the law enforcement 
                            and intelligence communities, and publicly available information to help identify individuals 
                            and entities involved in illicit actions, including terrorist financing. FinCEN’s information can 
                            also contribute to the development of economic sanctions against those involved in terrorist 
                            financing and can support law enforcement criminal investigations. FinCEN also may pursue 
                            enforcement actions again entities or individuals that substantially violate their obligations.  
                            OIA works with the U Sintelligence community to identify specific illicit finance threats, 
                            including terrorist threats within the NPO sector, that then initiate broatderearg iencn y 
                            discussion about responses to these threats, particularly administrative sanctions actions.  
                            OFAC administers and enforces economic and trade sanctions based on U fSoreign policy and 
                            national security goals against targeted foreign countries and regimes, terrorists, international 
                            narcotics traffickers, those engaged in activities related to the proliferation of weapons of mass 
                            destruction, and other threats.  OFAC acts under Presidential national emergency powers, as 
                            well as authority granted by specific legislation, to impose controls on transactions and freeze 
                            assets under USju risdiction, including the imposition of sanctions against charities for 
                            supporting terrorist organisations. Many of the sanctions are based on United Nations and 
                            other international mandates, are multilateral in scope, and involve close cooperation with 
                            allied governments.  
                        2015                                                                                                                                                                 41 
        BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
        RECOMMENDATION 8 
                              Box 18. Canada 
         The national regulator of registered charities in Canada, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), 
         has statutory authority to share information with relevant national security and law 
         enforcement partners where there are concerns that a charity is engaged in providing support 
         to terrorism. To facilitate the sharing of information, a secondment program between the CRA 
         and its partners has been instituted: CRA employees are seconded to the partner agencies and 
         employees from the partner agencies are seconded to the CRA. Employees participating in this 
         program are fully integrated into their host agencies, bringing with them the experience and 
         expertise required to identify risks pertaining specifically to the NPO sector. The program 
         further assists partners in undearstnding each other’s roles in the w-hofol-egovernment 
         approach to countering terrorism financing. This has enabled the CRA and its partner agencies 
         to alert one another of situations involving NPOs that support terrorism and to take 
         appropriate measures to protect the NPO sector. 
        42                                                2015  
                                                                         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                            RECOMMENDATION 8 
                          EFFECTIVE MECHANISMS FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION  
                                                                        Box 19. Canada, New Zealand, and United Kingdom 
                               Several countries, including Canada, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, have 
                               independently developed online tools to make certain information about NPOs publicly 
                               available.  
                               These countries provide access to online databases that allow the general publi cto search for 
                               and access information related to the status, activities, finances and governing boards of NPOs. 
                               Some of these tools allow users to display information graphically in charts and tables, make 
                               connections between NPOs, and to access copies of governing documentlaws as, byn-d 
                               financial statements.  
                               These tools help promote transparency and maintain public trust in the NPO sector. They also 
                               provide a means through which information can be shared internationally. Because the 
                               databases are public, international partners can access them to find information on NPOs that 
                               operate outside of their jurisdiction.  
                                                                                                                     Box 20. 
                               UN Security Council Resolutions 1267 and 1373 have helped foster international cooperation 
                               in identifying and taking sanctions action against NPOs and their officials involved in terrorist 
                               financing. UNSCR 1267 provides for a global sanctions regime against al Qaida and affiliated 
                               groups.  UNSCR 1373 allows for countries to take domestic and coordinated bilateradl a/orn 
                               multilateral sanctions against terrorist threats. 
                               A recent group of UN 1267 listings includes the Indonesian organ isHaItLioALn AHMAR 
                               SOCIETY INDONESIA (HASI), designated by the UN on March 13, 2015,  pursuant to 
                               paragraphs 2 and 4 of resolution 2161 (2014) as being as-sQoaicidata fed wor ith Al
                               “participating in the financing, planning, facilitating, preparing, or perpetrating of acts or 
                               activities by, in conjunction with, under the name of, on behalf of, or in support of”, “recruiting 
                               for” and “otherwise supporting acts or activities of” Jemaah Islamiyah. 
                               Hilal Ahmar Society Indonesia (HASI) is the ostensibly humanitarian wing of Jemaah Islamiyah 
                               (JI). Since 2011, HASI has operated as a non-governmental organisation in Indonesia. While not 
                               indicative of the activities of the charitable sector as a whole, the activities of HASI 
                               demonstrate how terrorist groups, such as JI, continue to abuse charitable giving to raise and 
                               use funds to support violent acts and provide cover for logistical requirements for their 
                               terrorist organisation. JI is responsible for numerous acts of terrorism including the Bali 
                               bombing in 2002, which killed over 200 people from 27 countries.  
                               www.un.org/sc/committees/1267/NSQDe147E.shtml  
                           2015                                                                                                                                                                                        43 
         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
         RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                     ANNEX 2 
                                           
            EXAMPLES OF MEASURES THAT NPOS HAVE IMPLEMENTED AND 
              WHICH MAY, DEPENDING ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES, HELP TO 
                                   MITIGATE RISK 
         1.  These are examples of measures that have been implemented by some NPOs and which may, 
         depending on the circumstances, help to mitigate TF risk. In practice, the unique circumstances and 
         context of each case will determine whether a particular measure is a good practice that is partially 
         or fully mitigating the specific risk involved. The types of circumstances and context which are 
         relevant to such a determination include: the level and type of TF risk, the type of charitable funds 
         or assets being distributed, the geographical context, and other controls and due diligence measures 
         in place, for example. 
         2.  These examples should not be used as a checklist or “gold standard” of measures to be 
         applied to all NPOs. A “one size fits all” approach would not be consistent with proper 
         implementation of a risk-based approach, as called for by Recommendation 8.   
         3.  The following examples, which were provided by NPOs, are presented unrd tehe following 
         four categories:     Box 21. Good governance for NPOs 
           Robust internal governance practices for NPOs can be grouped into the following four 
           categories:  
             1)  Organisational integrity; 
             2)  Partner relationships; 
             3)  Financial transparency and accountability; and 
             4)  Programme planning and monitoring. 
          
          
         44                                                           2015  
                                BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                  RECOMMENDATION 8 
            ORGANISATIONAL INTEGRITY  
                                                   Box 22. 
              An international NPO has provided key features of NPO accountability systems that address 
              the concept of organisational integrity. These features are addressed in the following charts: 
                    Essential NGO internal governance indicators 
                    Clear              Name of body 
                    governance         Description of relationship to other organisational entities 
                    structure,         (board functions must be separate from management) 
                    particularly 
                    role of the        List of current Board members with occupations and 
                    governing          cities/towns of residence 
                    body (the 
                    Board).            (where appropriate, the controller/beneficial owner of 
                                       NGO should also be identified) 
                    Governing          Basic responsibilities and powers 
                    body               Duties of individual board members 
                    description to     Minimum number of board members 
                    include:           Membership rules (including eligibility, suspension and 
                                       expulsion) and terms of office (length of terms, limits on 
                                       re-election) 
                                       Clear election procedure 
                                       Minimum number of board meetings and method of 
                                       convening meetings 
                                       Decision-making procedures (number needed for quorum, 
                                       how to vote and record decisions) with explicit 
                                       indications that decisions are to be taken collectively 
                                       Record of Board meeting minutes 
                                       Conflict-of-interest provisions (for the Board and 
                                       organisation overall) 
                                       Board member remuneration (Board Members should not 
                                       receive compensation beyond reimbursement of 
                                       expenses) 
             2015                                                                            45 
            BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
            RECOMMENDATION 8 
                    Board              Annual review of CEO performance 
                    competencies       Review of financial (management) performance / annual 
                    to include:        financial statements 
                                       Responsibility to recruit CEO 
                                       Responsibility to engage auditor 
               
                    Essential financial management indicators 
                    Existence of       Books of accounts (general ledger, general journal etc.) 
                    basic              Cash receipts book 
                    accounting         Cash disbursements book 
                    tools:             Bank accounts records 
                    Basic              Written policies and procedures that follow accepted 
                    accounting          principles of accounting and control 
                    practices:         Division of functions: the approving officer for fund 
                                        releases (e.g. CEO) is different from the bookkeeper and 
                                        the cash custodian. 
                    Financial          Annual audits commissioned by the Board (auditor must 
                    reporting and       not have a relationship to anyone in the organisation) 
                    record-keeping 
                    Fraud              Existence of full and accurate audit trails of funds 
                    prevention and      transferred outside NGO jurisdiction/country 
                    anti-money         Use of registered bank accounts for money flows in case 
                    laundering          of every transaction (small amounts of cash for daily 
                    practices           expenditure excepted) 
                                       Procedures to verify the identity, credentials and good 
                                        faith of their beneficiaries, donors and associate NGOs 
                                       Secure and confidential maintenance of the list of bank 
                                        account numbers under the name of the NGO and any 
                                        document on identifying information of persons 
            46                                                                              2015  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Advanced                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sound investment policies 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             systems (for                                                                                                                                                                                              Resource generation plan 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             more 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             developed 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             organisations) 
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Box 23. 
                                                                                                                                                            An NPO developed a Code of Ethics1, which encompasses a statement of principles of 
                                                                                                                                                            development as well as a code of conduct, and outlines the ethical principles that must be 
                                                                                                                                                            adhered to, and promoted, by the organisation and its members. 
                                                                                                                                                            Below is an excerpt from the Code which relates to organisational integrity, as defined in the 
                                                                                                                                                            report:  
                                                                                                                                                            Governance:   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Each Organization shall be governed fairly and responsibly by an independent, active, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and informed governing body (e.g. Board of Directors). 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    All voting members of the governing body shall serve without compensation, except for 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     reasonable expenses incurred to fulfil their organizational duties. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Each Organization shall establish and periodically review a governance framework 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     suitable for fulfilling its mandate. The structure shall enable the Organization to make 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     timely decisions and to meet its responsibilities. The framework shall include an 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     appropriate governance structure and operations; relationship of senior staff and the 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     governing body; and decision-making processes. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Organization's governing body shall review and approve the Organization’s annual 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     budget, significant policies, key financial transactions, compensation practices, plans 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and programs and hold officers, committees and staff accountable for actions taken and 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     results achieved under delegated authority. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Organization shall adopt a policy preventing and effectively managing conflict of 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     interest situations. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Organization shall have policies prohibiting discrimination and promoting gender 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     equality and participation of disadvantaged groups at all levels of the Organization. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     This does not supersede the right of the Organization to self-define when it is done in 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     compliance with the law. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The governing body shall periodically reassess the Organization’s governing documents 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and objects, vision, mission, goals, priorities, alignment of resources and effectiveness 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     through consultation and collaborative planning. 
                                                                                                                                   2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    47 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                
               Organizational Integrity: 
                       The affairs of the Organization shall be conducted with integrity and transparency. The 
                        Organization shall make full, open, and accurate disclosure to the public of relevant 
                        information concerning its goals, programs, finances, activities, results, effectiveness and 
                        governance. Exceptions are personnel matters, legal matters, proprietary information 
                        and ethical and legal requirements of personal privacy. 
                       The Organization shall ensure that complaints are dealt with in a timely manner and 
                        impartially, respecting the rights of involved parties for confidentiality and disclosure. 
                       The Organization shall comply with all applicable federal laws and regulations as well 
                        as laws and regulations of provinces or municipalities in which it is based or operates. 
                        Each Organization conducting activities outside of Canada shall be aware of foreign 
                        laws and regulations governing its activities. 
                       The Organization shall oppose and shall not be a participant to any wrongdoing or 
                        financial impropriety. It shall take prompt and firm corrective action whenever and 
                        wherever wrong-doing of any kind has been committed by any member of its governing 
                        body, employee, or volunteer.   
               1. Canadian Council for International Co-operation “Code of Ethics”, www.ccic.ca/about/ethics_e.php,  
                                                        Box 24. 
               An NPO has produced a series of best practices to improve transparency and good governance. 
               These best practices are designed to provide other organisations with a guide to develop 
               internal guidelines.  
               Organisational integrity guidelines are included in the following chart: 
                     General              Inclusion of ethical behaviour  and equality policies 
                     guidelines           Non remuneration concept for board members 
             48                                                                                     2015  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Description of                                                                                                                                                                                             Basic responsibilities and powers 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the board                                                                                                                                                                                                  Obligations and responsibilities of individual board 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   members 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Requirement of self-evaluation 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Right of board members to receive information on 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   financial accounts and activities of the organisation 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Conflict of interest provisions 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Description of                                                                                                                                                                                             Recruitment standards and definition of functions 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the                                                                                                                                                                                                        Encouragement of professional development, equal 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             management                                                                                                                                                                                                                            opportunities and accessibility 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             team                                                                                                                                                                                                       Requirement to evaluate management of employees of the 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   organisation 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Conflict of interest provisions   
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    49 
                          BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                          RECOMMENDATION 8 
                          PARTNER RELATIONSHIPS  
                                                                                                                     Box 25. 
                               An independent monitoring organisation, whose aim is to increase public confidence in the 
                               country’s NPOs and help donors make responsible decisions, developed a report on Standards 
                               of Transparency and Best Practices. The Standards, which are used to assess compliance by the 
                               NPO sector, are structured in blocks, most of which are relevant to countering the financing of 
                               terrorism, including some that address partner relationships:  
                                                                           NPOs should have a documented procedure and criteria for the 
                                                                               selection of counterpart organisations. This procedure should be 
                                                                               approved by the governing body. Criteria could include the 
                                                                               requirement that the counterpart organisation be linked to the 
                                                                               organisation’s mission, have demonstrated experience in similar 
                                                                               projects, have received funds from its government or from 
                                                                               international public organisations, comply with legal and tax 
                                                                               obligations, and have sound financial structure. 
                                                                           NPOs should have written agreements with their partner 
                                                                               organisations. A written agreement or understanding should be 
                                                                               drafted and signed by the participants. This should include the funding 
                                                                               organisation and the end user, whether it is an individual, organisation 
                                                                               or network. Such an agreement should outline what the funds are to be 
                                                                               used for and how the user will report back for accountability purposes. 
                                                                               The agreement should also include requirements regarding the 
                                                                               management of local employees according to defined ethical 
                                                                               standards. 
                                                                                                                     Box 26. 
                               An organisation working in areas of conflict has developed guidelines for screening donors and 
                               partners to prevent the abuse of funds. The organisation verifies that partners are not 
                               connected with terrorist organisations and that they do not receive donations, contract, 
                               partner or share services with any organisation found in violation of or accused of violating 
                               human rights. The organisation’s accountants conduct background research on partner 
                               organisations and trends using open source information from Interpol, FATF and the 
                               equivalent of the Ministry of Finance in ot juherrisdictions, such as the US Department of 
                               Treasury OFAC Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) sanctions list. The organisation also 
                               coordinates with other internaitonal NPOs to learn about possible infractions by a potential 
                               donor from the perspective of another organisation. 
                          50                                                                                                                                                                                     2015  
                                BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                  RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                   Box 27. 
              An NPO that provides humanitarian assistance to h igarh reas enisk    gages partner 
              organisations to oversee the distribution of aid. Once due diligence checks are complete and a 
              partner has been selected, the NPO enters into a written agreement with the partner 
              organisation. In addition to outlining the partner’s responsibilities related to distribution 
              schedules, payment conditions, and the general expectations for the distribution of aid, the 
              written agreement contains the following clauses related to the prevention and misuse of 
              funds for terrorist financing purposes: 
                                 Standard certification by the partner organisation that they are 
                                  incompliance with all laws that prohibit transactions or providing 
                                  benefit to a terrorist group (the clause is based on the laws of NPOs 
                                  home country) and will not provide any support or assistance to 
                                  terrorist supporting persons or entities;  
                                 Standard certification that the partner and its principals  are not a 
                                  debarred, ineligible, voluntarily excluded or suspended party by any 
                                  Federal department or agency;  
                                 A specific clause prohibiting the partner from providing assistance to 
                                  or allowing distribution, handling or allocation of assistance by 
                                  military or combatant groups; 
                                 A specific clause that the partner agrees that, under no circumstances 
                                  will any funds provided to any or any other entity or individual named 
                                  on the Specially Designated Nationals list promulgated by the Office of 
                                  Foreign Assets Control, or any other ineligible party as defined by the 
                                  United States Government, European Union or the United Nations; and 
                                 A clause that requires, among other things, that the local partner to 
                                  report any instances of diversion or interference by any armed group, 
                                  including any terrorist organisation.  
              When possible, the signing of the written agreement is witnessed by community and partner 
              stakeholders. This ensures that those involved are aware of and understand the provisions of 
              the contract, and ensures that the entire community will safeguard its implementation. 
             2015                                                                            51 
          BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
          RECOMMENDATION 8 
          FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY  
                                         Box 28. 
           An independent monitoring organisation, whose aim is to increase public confidence in the 
           country’s NPOs and help donors make responsible decisions, developed a report on Standards 
           of Transparency and Best Practices. The Standards, which are used to assessc ompliance by the 
           NPO sector, are structured in blocks, most of which are relevant to countering the financing of 
           terrorism, including some that address financial accountability and transparency:  
                           NPOs should have a documented policy for the procurement of goods 
                            or selection of suppliers and for the approval of expenses. It is 
                            recommended to request three quotes from different suppliers and, 
                            for high cost goods/services order, to create a call for proposals with 
                            specific criteria to ensure the best goods/services are obtained. It is 
                            also recommended to create a standard operating procedure to avoid 
                            possible conflict of interest between suppliers and the 
                            board/employee/partners of the organisation. Finally, it is 
                            recommended to conduct periodical monitoring of the suppliers to 
                            ensure that their on-going standards of efficiency, effectiveness, 
                            sustainability and quality meet organisation guidelines. All these 
                            criteria/procedures are required to be approved by the governing 
                            body. This policy should establish who has the power to authorise 
                            expenses in the organisation, depending for example on the amount. 
                           Sources of financing, including details regarding the main contributors, 
                            both public and private, as well as the amounts contributed, should be 
                            available to the public. 
                           NPOs should prepare an annual budget for the next year with its 
                            corresponding Director’s report and analytical review, including 
                            variances corresponding to the previous year's budget. The budget 
                            and the liquidation should be approved by the governing board and be 
                            available to the public. 
                           NPOs should prepare follow-up and final reports on the projects and 
                            make them available to donors. 
                           NPOs should have a documented anti-corruption policy. Organisations 
                            should analyse and define the risks of corruption in the specific 
                            context they are working in (e.g. fraud, excessive pricing and kick-
                            backs, double payments, cumulated salaries or exchange rate 
                            manipulation.)  NPOs should have adequate systems in place like 
                            accurate project planning, transparent financial reporting, regular 
          52                                                              2015  
                  BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                               RECOMMENDATION 8 
                   project reporting and standards for procurements for goods and 
                   suppliers as well as double-checks and independent information 
                   sources. There should be a standardised process to be followed when 
                   cases of misuse of funds are discovered, including information flow, 
                   actions to be taken and sanctions to be imposed. 
                             Box 29. 
        An NPO that provides humanitarian assistance to high risk areas uses a variety of internal 
        controls to prevent, deter and detect fraudulent activities, including the diversion of resources 
        to prohibited parties. 
        Internal controls which are implemented to promote financial accountability and transparency 
        include:   Responsibilities in key financial, procurement and asset custody 
                   processes are separated among several employees rather than 
                   entrusted to one employee. When procuring a good, for example, the 
                   following are done by separate employees: originating the 
                   procurement request, collecting quotations, selecting the vendor, 
                   receipt of goods and payment. 
                   Signatures are required by the originator, approver and financial 
                   reviewer at several stages in any financial transaction process in order 
                   to avoid unauthorised transactions. Moreover, the organisation 
                   maintains a document which outlines the key transactions and 
                   functions for which approval must be sought and who has the 
                   authority to approve the transaction and up to what level. 
                   Regular checks are done to verify the existence of assets. These checks 
                   include regular and surprise cash counts and annual physical 
                   equipment inventories.  
                   A system of double-checks or reviews with all financial transactions is 
                   used. Every financial transaction is approved by an employee other 
                   than the originator, and has a financial review by a separate employee. 
                   In addition, when used, checks require two signatures, and all bank 
                   transfers require dual signatures.  
                   Budget versus actual expenditure reports are prepared and reviewed 
                   with senior management on a monthly basis.  
                   Manuals and guidelines which provide procedures for support 
                   functions in the areas of finance, procurement, administration and 
        2015                                        53 
        BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
        RECOMMENDATION 8 
                      asset management are required to be followed by all of the 
                      organisation’s field programs. 
                                Box 30. 
         An NPO that operates internationally and occasionally cont  UraNc Ats gencies and other 
         humanitarian organisations to provide humanitarian relief implements several measures to 
         maintain accountability and transparency over the use of funds. These measures include the: 
                     Evaluation and review of program design, budget, feasibility, and 
                      assessment of the risks associated with prospective projects. 
                     Implementation of contractual requirements for procurement 
                      processes, regular reporting on the program impact, and budgetary 
                      allocations with supporting documentation.  
                     Transfer of financial transactions through major financial institutions 
                      whenever possible to ensure that all funds can be traced to the 
                      delivery of services or humanitarian items to the beneficiary. 
                     Examination of partners’ bookkeeping practices and confirmation that 
                      expenses reported are substantiated and match the allowed 
                      expenditures. 
                     Adherence to generally accepted accounting principles and 
                      undertaking of independent annual audits.   
                                Box 31. 
         An NPO operating in high risk areas uses the following measures to enhance financial 
         accountability and transparency:   
                     Only makes transfers against performance milestones 
                     Ensures financial reporting expectations are clear 
                     Asks for copies of original source documents to substantiate 
                      expenditures 
                     Asks for partners to use a separate bank account and/or ledger for 
                      your funds 
                     Requires that partners seek permission for variances from project 
        54                                                2015  
                                                                BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                     RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                     budgets 
                                                                  Puts a positive obligation to self report on non-compliance in the 
                                                                     contract terms  
                                                                  Has clear financial manuals and record keeping guides  and manual of 
                                                                     operations for overseas employees 
                                                                  Ensures overseas employees are trained on financial management 
                                                                     practices 
                                                                  Insists that interest on project funds be reinvested into the project 
                                                                     activities  
                                                                  Is clear on financial record keeping expectations 
                                                                  Maintains and exercises audit rights  
                            The NPO sets out the types of expenses it is willing to fund for each project. Any other expenses 
                            are not reimbursable. This mitigates the chances of potential misunderstandings with partners 
                            but also lowers the risk of funds being abused. 
                        2015                                                                                                                                                                 55 
         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
         RECOMMENDATION 8 
         PROGRAMME PLANNING AND MONITORING  
                                     Box 32. 
          An independent monitoring organisation, whose aim is to increase public confidence in the 
          country’s NPOs and help donors make responsible decisions, developed a report on Standards 
          of Transparency and Best Practices. The Standards, which are used to assess compliance by the 
          NPO sector, are structured in blocks, most of which are relevant to countering the financing of 
          terrorism, including some that address programme planning and monitoring:  
                         NPOs should have a documented policy for planning, monitoring and 
                         evaluating their projects. This should include requirements regarding 
                         narrative and financial reporting by the implementing partner 
                         organisation(s), audits, on-site inspections, and frequency and scope of 
                         external or internal evaluations. It should also include periodic 
                         payments to partner organisations based on satisfactory reporting and 
                         the possibility to withhold money if reporting requirements are not 
                         met. The policy should specify how partner organisations and 
                         beneficiaries participate in the process of planning, implementing and 
                         evaluating of projects, and should be approved by the governing body. 
                         NPOs should establish a multi-year strategy and/or annual plan, which 
                         is approved by governing body. The annual plan should clearly 
                         indicate the objectives, indicators, calendar and area responsible of the 
                         implementation of the project. Also, the plan should include all areas of 
                         the organisation, including activities such as fundraising. It is a good 
                         practice to include different stakeholders in the development of the 
                         plan, like beneficiaries, volunteers and employees. The governing body 
                         should also be involved in the development, discussion and approval 
                         of the plan. 
                         NPOs should establish a policy, which is approved by governing body, 
                         that calls for an assessment of the organisation’s achievements, 
                         effectiveness and impact and that it take place at least every two years. 
                                     Box 33. 
          An NPO that provides humanitarian assistance to high risk areas employs a series of internal 
          monitoring measures to ensure that funds and services are being used as intended. These 
          include:       Identification of beneficiary groups through a consultative process 
         56                                                        2015  
                                                                         BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                            RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                               involving local partners and often community representatives.  
                                                                           Verification and screening of potential beneficiaries and local partners 
                                                                               connections to “prohibited parties”1. 
                                                                           Regular and timely reporting of budget versus actual expenditure 
                                                                               reports are prepared and reviewed by senior management on a 
                                                                               monthly basis. 
                                                                           Delivery verification processes, such as beneficiary verification 
                                                                               (including beneficiary signature or thumbprint to confirm receipt of 
                                                                               goods, as well as the date, and commodities received), distribution 
                                                                               monitoring (employing monitors who are based in the targeted 
                                                                               communities to directly monitor distribution or via photos or videos of 
                                                                               the distribution by local partners when direct monitoring isn’t 
                                                                               possible) and post distribution monitoring (visiting and surveying 
                                                                               with a sample of beneficiaries). 
                                                                           Regular physical checks to verify the existence of assets. These checks 
                                                                               include regular and surprise cash counts and annual physical 
                                                                               equipment inventories. 
                                                                           Multi-signature requirements by the originator, approver and financial 
                               1                                               reviewer at several stages in any financial transaction process. 
                                  According to the policy of this NPO, prohibited parties are collectively described as any party 
                               believed to be supporting terrorism and/or one of the parties listed on a prohibited party list, 
                               or any party that is otherwise actively engaged in fighting or actively supporting armed groups 
                               in a high-risk country. It is also this NPO’s policy to prohibit paying bribes to any party, or 
                               paying fees to any political authorities in a high ris-kcountry, whether or not these persons or 
                               entities are included on any prohibited parties list. In this regard, political authorities in a high 
                               risk-country are also considered prohibited parties. 
                                                                                                                     Box 34. 
                               An international NPO engaged in the provision of humanitarian relief through implementing 
                               partners takes the following measures when working in areas of conflict in which sanctioned 
                               or designated entities or individuals are engaged in territorial control.  
                                                                           Ensures cultural competency and engages community leaders and 
                                                                               stakeholders to help secure the delivery of humanitarian aid in a 
                                                                               manner that reduces potential for diversion. 
                                                                           Actively monitors and ceases aid distribution if diversion occurs. 
                                                                           Delivers aid to areas bordering or in proximity to conflict zone in cases 
                           2015                                                                                                                                                                                        57 
                       BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                       RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                     where a sanctioned or designated entities or individuals is exerting 
                                                                     territorial control, to reduce the risk of resources being diverted.   
                            These measures were applied in the following case: 
                            A designated entity took control of a city where the NPO, operating through a domestic 
                            implementing partner, was delivering aid services to the beneficiary population. The 
                            designated entity attempted to take over the distribution of aid by ‘-rbreanding’ resources as 
                            their own. The implementing partner informed the designated entity that it would cease the 
                            distribution of aid, and withdrew from the contested area. The implementing partner moved 
                            its resources back to a central warehouse until such time whuetnion w distoruibld be 
                            acceptable according to the NPO’s terms. Eventually, the implementing partner was able to 
                            distribute aid in surrounding areas that were not under the control of the designated entity 
                            and where the beneficiary population had congregated. 
                       58                                                                                                                                                               2015  
                                    BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                       ANNEX 3 
                                                              
                        A LIST OF REPRESENTATIONAL AND SELF-REGULATORY 
                                                  ORGANISATIONS 
             1.     The NPO sector in many countries has representational and self-regulatory organisations that 
             have developed standards and initiatives to help individual organisations ensure accountability and 
             transparency in their operations, including strengthened internal controls and risk mitigation 
             measures.              25
             2.     One World Trust  has undertaken a project that provides an inventory of civil society self-
             regulatory initiatives worldwide. The project examines 309 initiatives currently in use and offers 
             insights into patterns at national, regional and international levels. 
             3.     The following list, taken from the One World Trust’s website, shows 83 examples of civil 
             society organisations that undertake certification initiatives. 
             4.     This list is not comprehensive and included only as examples of initiatives in the NPO sector. 
             The FATF is not in a position to verify substance of each entry in this list.  
                 Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                      Program name               Certifying organisation                Location 
                Committed to Excellence        European Foundation for        Europe 
                                               Quality Management 
                EFA Certification              European Fundraising           Europe 
                COA Eighth Edition             Association 
                Standards                      Council on Accreditation       International 
                ForeignAid Certification       Foreign Aid Ratings LLC        International 
                Global Accountability Report   One World Trust                International 
                                                                   
             25
                   The One World Trust is an independent charity that conducts research, develops recommendations and 
                   advocates for  reform  to make policy and decisi-onmaking processes in global governance more 
                   accountable to the people they affect now and in the future, and to ensure that international laws are 
                   strengthened and applied equally to all. 
              2015                                                                                       59 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                 Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                      Program name               Certifying organisation               Location 
                HAP 2007 Standard in           Humanitarian Accountability 
                Humanitarian Accountability    Partnership International      International 
                and Quality Management 
                ISO 14000: Environmental       International Organisation     International 
                Management Systems             for Standardisation 
                ISO 9000: Quality              International Organisation     International 
                Management Standards           for Standardisation 
                NGO Benchmarking               Societe Generale de            International 
                Certification                  Surveillance 
                Principles and Standards for   Fundraising Institute of       Australia 
                Fundraising Practice           Australia 
                ACFID Code of Conduct          Australian Council for         Australia 
                                               International Development 
                Austrian Seal of Quality for   Österreichischen 
                Donations                      Spendengütesiegels             Austria 
                Guia de Gestão Responsável     (Austrian Donors Label) 
                para OSC (Guide of             Parceiros Voluntarios          Brazil 
                Responsible Management for     (Volunteer Partners) 
                Civil Society Organizations) 
                NGO Governance and 
                Professional Practice Code of 
                Ethical Principles and         Cooperation Committee for      Cambodia 
                Minimum Standard for NGOs      Cambodia 
                in Cambodia and Voluntary 
                Certification Scheme 
                Code of Ethics and             Canadian Council for           Canada 
                Operational Standards          International Co-operation 
                Standards of Organizational    Canadian Council of            Canada 
                Integrity and Accountability   Christian Charities 
             60                                                                                       2015  
                                        BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                      RECOMMENDATION 8 
                   Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                        Program name                  Certifying organisation                    Location 
                 Charte de Déontologie des 
                 organisations sociales et 
                 humanitaires faisant appel a 
                 la generosite du public 
                 (Charter of ethics and             Le Comité de la Charte            France 
                 conduct for humanitarian 
                 and social services 
                 organisations seeking funds 
                 from the general public) 
                 Label "Gouvernance et 
                 Gestion Responsible" des 
                 associations et des 
                 fondations ("Governanace           Association Française de          France 
                 and Responsible                    Normalisation certification 
                 Management" Label for 
                 Foundations and 
                 Associations)                      Citizens Advocate! Program 
                 Code of Ethics                     // Civic Initaitive Center        Georgia 
                                                    Deutsches Zentralinstitut für 
                 DZI Spenden-Siegels (DZI           soziale Fragen (German            Germany 
                 Donation Seal)                     Central Institute for Social 
                                                    Issues) 
                 Initiative Transparente            Transparency International        Germany 
                 Zivilgesellschaft                  Deutschland e. V 
                 Trademark of Trust                 Civil Society Development         Hungary 
                                                    Foundation Hungary 
                 Charity Research Initiative        Copal Partners                    India 
                 GiveIndia Credibility Alliance     GiveIndia                         India 
                 Norms and Good Practices 
                 around Governance and              Credibility Alliance              India 
                 Public Disclosure 
               2015                                                                                                 61 
               BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
               RECOMMENDATION 8 
                   Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                         Program name                   Certifying organisation                      Location 
                  The Omega Rating                    Indian Confederation of             India  
                  Certification of Indonesian         NGOs 
                  NGOs                                Satunama                            Indonesia 
                  Carta della donazione               Istituto Italiano della 
                  (Charter for donation)              Donazione (Italian Institute        Italy 
                                                      of Donation) 
                                                      Academy for Educational 
                  Partners in NGO Excellence          Development- Jordan Civil           Jordan 
                                                      Society Program 
                  National HIV and AIDS               National AIDS Control               Kenya 
                  Response Code of Conduct            Council 
                  Indicadores de 
                  Institucionalidad y                 Centro Mexicano para la 
                  Transparencia (Governance           Filantropia (Mexican Centre         Mexico 
                  and Transparency                    for Philanthropy) 
                  Indicators)                         Centraal Bureau 
                  Certificate for small charities     Fondsenwerving (The                 Netherlands 
                                                      Central Bureau on 
                                                      Fundraising) 
                                                      Centraal Bureau 
                  Certificate of No Objection         Fondsenwerving (The                 Netherlands 
                                                      Central Bureau on 
                                                      Fundraising) 
                                                      Centraal Bureau 
                  Seal of Approval                    Fondsenwerving (The                 Netherlands 
                                                      Central Bureau on 
                                                      Fundraising) 
                  NPO Certification Model             Pakistan Center for                 Pakistan 
                                                      Philathrophy 
               62                                                                                                     2015  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RECOMMENDATION 8 
                                                                                                                                                                         Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Program name                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Certifying organisation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Location 
                                                                                                                                                            Certificate of Good 
                                                                                                                                                            Governance for Palestinian 
                                                                                                                                                            Non-Governmental                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AMAN Coalition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Palestinian Territories 
                                                                                                                                                            Organizations (NGOs) - 
                                                                                                                                                            Nazaha Project 
                                                                                                                                                            Sistema de Evaluación de                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Colegio de Organizaciones 
                                                                                                                                                            Desarrollo Organizacional-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        para el Dessarrollo Social 
                                                                                                                                                            SEDO (Evaluation of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (School of Organisations for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Paraguay 
                                                                                                                                                            Organizational Development                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Social Development) 
                                                                                                                                                            System)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Philippine Council for NGO 
                                                                                                                                                            NGO Certification                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Certification                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Philippines 
                                                                                                                                                            CSO rating agency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Humaneasy Consulting                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Portugal 
                                                                                                                                                            Accountability Standards                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accountability Alert- Sierra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sierra Leone 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Leone 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pravno-informacijski center 
                                                                                                                                                            Quality System for Slovenian                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nevladnih organizacij (Legal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Slovenia 
                                                                                                                                                            NGOs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Informational Centre for 
                                                                                                                                                            Norma ONG con Calidad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NGOs Slovenia) 
                                                                                                                                                            (Norms for NGO with                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Instituto para la Calidad ONG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Spain 
                                                                                                                                                            quality)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Institute for NGO Quality) 
                                                                                                                                                            Principles for Transparency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fundación Lealtad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Spain 
                                                                                                                                                            and Good Practice 
                                                                                                                                                            Accountability and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stiftelsen för 
                                                                                                                                                            Transparency Report and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Insamlingskontroll (Swedish                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sweden 
                                                                                                                                                            Norms for Ethical                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Foundation for Fundraising 
                                                                                                                                                            Fundraising                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Control) 
                                                                                                                                                            Label de qualité ZEWO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Stiftung ZEWO (ZEWO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Switzerland 
                                                                                                                                                            (ZEWO Seal of Approval)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Foundation) 
                                                                                                                                   2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    63 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                 Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                      Program name               Certifying organisation               Location 
                                               Konferenz der 
                                               Präsidentinnen und 
                                               Präsidenten grosser 
                Swiss NPO Code                 Hilfswerke (Conference of      Switzerland 
                                               the Presidents of Large 
                                               Humanitarian and Relief 
                                               Organisations) 
                NGO Quality Assurance          Development Network of 
                Mechanism (QuAM)               Indigenous Voluntary           Uganda 
                                               Association 
                Accountability Framework       Disasters Emergency            United Kingdom 
                                               Committee 
                Approved Provider              Mentoring and Befriending      United Kingdom 
                Standards                      Foundation 
                Investing in Volunteers        Investing in Volunteers        United Kingdom 
                Standard 
                Investors in People            Investors in People            United Kingdom 
                Standards 
                Matrix Quality Standard for 
                Information advice and         ENTO Ltd.                      United Kingdom 
                guidance services 
                New Philanthropy Capital       New Philanthropy Capital       United Kingdom 
                Charity Rating Database 
                NGOIndex Accountability        NGO Index                      United Kingdom 
                Services 
                Practical Quality Assurance 
                System for Small               Charities Evaluation Services  United Kingdom 
                Organisations Quality Mark 
                (PQASSO)                       Community Foundation 
                Quality Accreditation          Network                        United Kingdom 
             64                                                                                       2015  
                                   BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                           RECOMMENDATION 8 
                Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                     Program name               Certifying organisation               Location 
               Quality Performance Mark       Action 4 Advocacy              United Kingdom 
               THA's Quality Standard for     The Helplines Association      United Kingdom 
               Helplines 
               Pennsylvania Standards for 
               Excellence: An Ethics and      Pennsylvania Association for   United States 
               Accountability Code for the    Nonprofit Organisations 
               Nonprofit Sector 
               5 Star Rating System           Ministry Watch                 United States 
               Best in America                Independent Charities of       United States 
                                              America 
               Charity Navigator Ratings      Charity Navigator              United States 
               Charity Rating Guide           American Institute of          United States 
                                              Philanthropy 
               Child Sponsorship              InterAction - American 
               Accreditation Project          Council for Voluntary          United States 
                                              International Action 
               Code of Ethical Principles     Association of Fundraising     United States 
               and Standards                  Professionals 
               Criteria for membership in     Global Impact (formerly 
               Global Impact                  International Service          United States 
                                              Agencies) 
               ECFA Standards and Best        Evangelical Council for        United States 
               Practices                      Financial Accountability 
               GiveWell                       GiveWell (The Clear Fund)      United States 
              2015                                                                                     65 
             BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
             RECOMMENDATION 8 
                 Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                      Program name               Certifying organisation               Location 
                InterAction PVO (Private       InterAction - American 
                Voluntary Organisation)        Coucil for Voluntary           United States 
                Standards: Self Certification  International Action 
                Plus 
                International Declaration of 
                Fundamental Principles of      Non-Profit Evaluation &        United States 
                Standards of Excellence for    Resource Center (NPERCI) 
                Non-Profit Organizations 
                Louisiana Standards of         Louisiana Association of       United States 
                Excellence Certification       Nonprofit Organizations 
                Ohio Standards: Guiding        Ohio Association of Non-       United States 
                Principles                     profit Organisations 
                Oklahoma Standards for         Oklahoma Center for Non        United States 
                Excellence                     Profits 
                Quality Check, Accreditation   Joint Commission on 
                and Certification Programs     Accreditation of Healthcare    United States 
                Shining Lights and Donor       Organizations 
                Alerts                         Ministry Watch                 United States 
                Smart Givers Network           Charities Review Council       United States 
                Accountability Wizard          (Minnesota) 
                Standards for Charity          Better Business Bureau Wise    United States 
                Accountability                 Giving Alliance 
                                               National Leadership 
                Standards for Excellence       Roundtable on Church           United States 
                                               Management 
                Standards for excellence       Colorado Center for            United States 
                                               Nonprofit Excellence 
                Standards for Excellence       Delaware Associations for      United States 
                                               Nonprofit Agencies 
             66                                                                                       2015  
                                      BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
                                                                                                 RECOMMENDATION 8 
                  Table 1. Examples of civil society organisations that undertake certification initiatives1 
                       Program name                 Certifying organisation                 Location 
                Standards for Excellence: An     Maryland Association of 
                Ethics and Accountability        Nonprofit Organizations /        United States 
                Code for the Nonprofit           Standards for Excellence 
                Sector                           Institute 
                Standards of Ethics for 
                Nonprofit Organizations in       Utah Nonprofits Association      United States 
                Utah 
                Transparency Grade               Ministry Watch                   United States 
                1. Published on www.oneworldtrust.org/csoproject/cso/initiatives/results/?type=Certification+scheme  
               
               2015                                                                                           67 
        BEST PRACTICES PAPER ON COMBATING THE ABUSE OF NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS 
        RECOMMENDATION 8 
                        REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 
        CCIC (nd), Code of Ethics, www.ccic.ca/about/ethics_e.php, CCIC, Ottawa, Canada, (accessed 
            19 May 2015) 
        FATF (2014a), Risk of Terrorist Abuse in Non-Profit Organisations, FATF, Paris, France,  
            available on www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/methodsandtrends  
        FATF (2014b), Risk-Based Approach Guidance for the Banking Sector, FATF, Paris, France,  
            available on www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/fatfrecommendations 
        FATF (2013), National Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment , FATF, Paris, 
            France 
            available on www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/methodsandtrends 
        FATF (2013), Revised Guidance on AML/CFT and Financial Inclusion, FATF, Paris, France,  
            available on www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/financialinclusion 
        FATF (2012), FATF International Standards on the Combatting of Money Laundering and the 
            Financing of Terrorism & Proliferation, FATF, Paris, France,  
            www.fatf-gafi.org/recommendations 
        FATF (2008), FATF Terrorist Financing Typologies Report, FATF, Paris, France,  
            available on www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/methodsandtrends 
        Transparency International (2015), Addressing Corruption Risk in the EEA and Norway Grants, 
            Transparency International, Berlin, Germany,  
            www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/handbook_of_good_practices_preventing_corr
            uption_in_humanitarian_operations, (accessed 19 May 2015) 
         
        68                                                      2015  
