               
              WELCOME ON BOARD THE A2SEA VESSELS 
              Information leaflet regarding HSE procedures when coming onboard 
               
              GOING ON BOARD AN A2SEA VESSEL 
              Welcome on board, please respect our safety regulations at all times. 
              Please be aware that you will only be granted access to the site/vessels provided the following documents/certificates are 
              valid: 
                Professional certificates (e.g. welding, use of harness, etc.). No copies are accepted. 
                NOK form (if going offshore).  
                Valid Sea Survival certificate and a valid Health Certificate for Seafarers (if going offshore). 
                Passport 
              Copies of all your certificates must be forwarded to your contact person at A2SEA well ahead of your visit. 
              Prior to commencing your work on board / at site your certificates will be checked and you will not be allowed to commence 
              your work if the certificates are not in order. 
              In case of any emergency you must response according to the vessel emergency plan.  
              In case of any alarm STOP work immediately. Shut down electrical tools, turn off gas bottles and proceed to the 
              muster station (meeting point in case of emergency). 
               
              ARRIVAL  
              There are two ways of coming on board the vessel; 
              If done directly from the quay side by gangway, you must wear your PPE before you enter. As soon as you are on board, 
              you must be signed in. 
              Transfer to the vessel by crew boat may take place by FROG / Esvagt Basket or by boat landing. 
              Transfer via the FROG / Esvagt Basket requires an induction on quay prior to leaving. The FROG / Esvagt Basket induction 
              will be made during the site induction which is mandatory for everyone going offshore (if this will be used). 
               
              WHO IS RESPONSIBLE? 
              Subcontractor hired by A2SEA: 
                Supplying relevant certificates to A2SEA office/crew prior to visit. 
                Arrival on quay at agreed time. 
                Knowledge of HSE rules on board A2SEA vessels, cf. safety induction and this leaflet. 
                Knowledge of which PPE is required. 
                Wearing required PPE. 
                Bringing required certificates (originals) and passport. 
              At quay (A2SEA contact person): 
                Ensuring that PPE is worn correctly. 
                Ensuring that the person in question is listed on the POB (people on board) list/visitor log. 
              On board A2SEA vessel (duty officer / person in charge): 
                Ensuring that PPE is worn correctly. 
                Vessel induction / safety induction. 
                Certificate check. 
                Ensuring that toolbox talks are held according to SMS #7.5.9. 
                Issuing work permits. 
              Issued 30 June 2010, rev. 3                                                     1/3 
