                    - Getting Ready Together -
         For the population of England, Northern Ireland, Scotland,
                           and Wales
         This leaflet is being made electronically available to all 
         residents of what is currently known as the United Kingdom, 
         free of charge.
         The author is responsible for its content. It was inspired by the 
         Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency publication “If Crisis Or 
         War Comes”, 2018.
         The purpose of the brochure is to help us get ready for 
         expected and unexpected events from serious incidents and 
         extreme weather, to critical infrastructure attacks and hybrid or 
         traditional military conflicts. Brexit and its economic and 
         societal impact are a key concern.
         At all costs we must defend freedom, peace, and democracy yet
         we must understand that this is no longer being catered for by 
         Parliament, public authorities, county councils, or the private 
         companies and organisations responsible for ensuring that 
         society functions. Rather, we now share the collective 
         responsibility for our own security and safety.
         We are currently under threat from internal and external forces 
         and our willingness to assist one another is our one unifying 
         asset. By getting ready together, we can all contribute to the 
         survival of what remains of decency.
                     KEEP THIS LEAFLET!
                        Getting Ready Together
                             - 2 -
                   What would you do if…?
        Any emergency can potentially result in the restricted function or failure of 
        society to operate in the ways we are all used to. The most recent example 
        of this in practical terms comes from the August 2011 riots which started in 
        London, spread across the country, and lasted for five days. With a rising 
        trend in violent protest and counter-protest from extreme domestic groups 
        set against the UK governments own projections of food shortages and 
        major disruption and disorder in the event of a no deal Brexit, we are faced 
        with unprecedented yet quantifiable risks which the government has only 
        months left to address. But we face many other growing risks too.
        Climate change may increase the instances of flooding and wild fires; 
        incidents and conflicts in the rest of the world may result in shortages of a 
        variety of import items upon which we are heavily reliant – including fuel 
        and food. Disruptions to IT systems through security breaches and attacks 
        on undersea cables may have an impact on telecommunications, electricity, 
        gas, water, and oil supplies; medical and nuclear supplies could be disrupted
        through trade arrangements; a loss of satellite system access could impact 
        not only domestic use GPS, but military defences; a lack of migrant labour 
        could continue to impact domestic food production along with reduced farm
        subsidies...
        In less than five days, every day life could become extremely problematic:
          • Heating systems stop working
          • You have difficulties cooking or storing food
          • Panic buying and failed supply chain may mean shops see empty shelves
          • Domestic water supplies may be interrupted and contaminated
          • No petrol and diesel is available and charging points are inoperable
          • Payment systems, online banking, and ATMs are out of service
          • Landlines, mobile networks, and internet services stop working
          • Public transport and the emergency services are severely disrupted
          • Medical supplies and medicines become unavailable and hospitals face 
            critical incidents.
        Think about and discuss how you and those around you will cope in a
          situation where the things you rely upon every day face major
                        disruption.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 3 -
                         CONTENTS
        EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
        Getting Yourself Ready
        Disinformation
        Terrorist Attacks
        DEFENCE
        National Defences
        While We Are Under Attack
        State Of Alert
        WARNINGS, ALERTS, AND SHELTER
        BREXIT
        BASIC READINESS IN THE HOME
        ABOUT THIS LEAFLET AND DOING MORE
                       Getting Ready Together
                             - 4 -
                   Getting Yourself Ready...
        Your local councils, NHS trusts, and elected commissioners are responsible 
        for ensuring the core functions and emergency services – including care, 
        welfare, hospitals, pharmacies, and medical centres, policing, fire and 
        rescue, and schools - are co-ordinated and continue their operations, even in
        the event of a major emergency. These services are already under stress due 
        to austerity in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis and may not meet 
        the additional demands of a national or severe local crisis situation. In the 
        case of Brexit, it is unlikely service provision would meet capacity of 
        demand.
        Preparing yourself cannot fix these issues in the fabric of our public 
        administration, but it can enable you as a private individual to better cope 
        with a difficult set of circumstances, irrespective of the ultimate cause or 
        duration.
        In the event of a serious societal failure or emergency, everyone has a duty 
        to understand that state-led assistance will be prioritised, with those who are
        most vulnerable receiving help in the first instance. It is necessary to 
        understand that the state is straining to deal with poverty already, and 
        private organisations such as food banks are reliant on donations in order to 
        assist families and children who otherwise would have no access to food. 
        The truth is the majority of you have a responsibility to be prepared to cope 
        on your own for some time and, the better prepared you are, not only will 
        additional pressure on state-led assistance be reduced, but the more 
        opportunity you will personally have to help others who would otherwise 
        slip through the net.
        It is essential that you have water, food, and warmth. It is desirable you are 
        able to obtain information from the authorities and the media, and could 
        contact relatives if you are outside of easy distance to travel to them.
        Lists are provided herein suggesting items and foodstuffs to have at home.
         Think about and discuss geographical and infrastructure features or
           risks in your area. What do you need to know more about?
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 5 -
                     Disinformation...
        Hostile states, extremist groups, and private organisations are actively using
        misleading and deliberately false information to influence our values and 
        our actions. The aim is to reduce not only our preparedness but our 
        collective will to defend ourselves, creating distrust in the media and each 
        other while eroding the capacity of the state to function fairly or properly.
        This activity is increasing and also already does so exponentially around 
        critical incidents.
        The best way to defend yourself against this hostile disinformation – which 
        is one strand of hybrid warfare – is to ensure that you are taking steps to 
        critically assess the originator:
          • Is this information factually based or is it opinion?
          • What is the aim of the information? What does it suggest you do?
          • Who has created or distributed the material?
          • Do you know the source? Can you verify who they are? Are they 
            trustworthy?
          • Is the material or information available from any other trustworthy 
            source?
          • What is the date of the information? Is it current or old? Why has it
            been released at that moment in time?
                    Search for the information:
          If you have done your homework, you will discover false information
        quickly and effectively. Research everything where possible and never react
            on the basis of emotion alone – this is a targeting technique.
                      Disregard rumours:
         Always turn to more than one source in order to make an assessment of
                     information or material.
                       Do not share:
           Whenever you have a doubt about information, never pass it on.
           Disinformation relies on emotional responses to spread quickly.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 6 -
                     Terrorist Attacks…
        The United Kingdom has a long history of terrorist attacks, ranging from 
        domestic-led groups to external threat actors and, most recently, hostile 
        foreign states.
        Such attacks may be targeted against individuals or specific groups, the 
        general public at large, or may target critical infrastructure such as power 
        supplies or transportation networks. The United Kingdom has seen remotely
        activated bombs, suicide bombers, vehicle enabled attacks, bladed weapon 
        assaults, cyber attacks, and even chemical weapon deployments all within 
        living memory. Cyber attacks are currently ongoing, aimed at critical 
        infrastructure.
        Despite the variety of methods which could be employed in future terrorist 
        attacks, there is general advice which can be practically applied by you in 
        most situations:
          • Find a safe place and avoid joining or staying in large groups
          • When you are safe call 999 and tell the police what is happening 
            and what you can see
          • Where safe to do so warn others who may be approaching danger 
            or render help to those in need of assistance
          • If you carry a mobile telephone, ensure it is switched to silent and 
            do not telephone anyone who may be put in danger by a noise 
            alerting someone to their presence
          • Avoid using the telephone to make calls unless absolutely 
            necessary, it is likely the network could be overloaded and this 
            may affect the emergency services response
          • Where a request is made to you by the emergency services, follow 
            their instructions
          • Do not share images or information which is unconfirmed by the 
            authorities online or by any other means
          Think about and discuss your day to day environment. Is your
          workplace at risk? What are the procedures already in place? 
         Think about and discuss your personal contingency plans for large
        events you may attend. Do not rely solely on organisers and authorities.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 7 -
                     National Defences...
        The combined military forces of the United Kingdom are in place to protect 
        the state and the freedoms of those who live here. Unlike other countries, 
        there is no duty or expectation on those resident in the UK to act if the 
        country is threatened.
        Military Defence
        The British Army, Royal Navy, Royal Air Force, Territorial Army and 
        British Reserve Forces along with MI6, MI5, and other intelligence services
        and authorities are charged with the defence of our borders and territories, 
        along with carrying out allied activities (i.e. NATO) and humanitarian 
        missions (i.e. United Nations).
        Civil Defence
        The term Civil Defence applies to the resilience of society as a whole in the 
        event of or threat of war. It is the work carried out by national and local 
        authorities, councils, and private or voluntary organisations (including for 
        example, the British Red Cross). The aim of civil defence is ensure that 
        things such as healthcare and transportation continue to operate effectively 
        during conflict.
        Defence Issues
        Both military and civil defence in the United Kingdom has been diminished 
        in recent years due to the austerity measures which arose after the 2008 
        financial crisis. The current state of preparedness for war or the threat of 
        war should be regarded as being insufficient, despite the best efforts of the 
        dedicated serving members and those employed in domestic functions. The 
        intelligence services have openly admitted they have been blind-sided by 
        the scale of active hostile hybrid warfare campaigns and have been 
        stretched thin by counter-terrorism operations. Additionally, unlike some 
        other peer nations, there is no national duty for the civilian population to 
        contribute to the UK's defence. There is no conscription (military or civil), 
        and general national service ended many years ago. Internally, there are 
        growing threats of “civil war” from extremists.
         The world around the UK has shifted exponentially and the state has
         failed to address the changing needs of defence preparedness. The
          intelligence services and armed forces alone may not be enough. 
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 8 -
                 While We Are Under Attack...
        We should be capable of offering resistance to the various types of potential 
        and active attacks against our home, but this is unlikely given the issues 
        with our national defence.
        Attacks are currently taking place against our critical infrastructure, our 
        democratic institutions, and our values. These attacks are using cyber and 
        psychological warfare techniques, as well as compromise of individuals and
        infiltration of political organisations.
        Our European and NATO allies are also under attack and we are facing the 
        prospect of significant impact to our defence capabilities and ability to 
        effectively co-operate due to Brexit. There is a growing possibility that 
        these hybrid attacks, aimed at destabilisation and weakening of group 
        defences, could transition to traditional or conventional warfare within the 
        next few years. We are also at significant risk of domestic unrest due to a 
        number of internal threat actors being sponsored and/or supported by hostile
        foreign states.
        Potential future attacks may include:
          • Cyber-led attacks on critical infrastructure
          • Physical sabotage operations, including transport routes, power 
            lines and even nuclear facilities
          • Terror attacks against key targets and gatherings/events
          • Continued efforts to influence top level personnel and 
            representatives, and the general public at large.
          • Severance of critical undersea cables
          • Disturbance to import/export routes
          • Disruption to gas and oil supplies
          • Transition to conventional warfare methods
         If the United Kingdom continues to be attacked by hostile states and
          responds as it has done so far, it is unlikely to successfully resist.
        At a government level, the UK has failed to fully acknowledge the live
          threat it faces and subsequently the public at large are generally
          uninformed as to the scale and diversity of the ongoing attacks.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 9 -
                      State Of Alert...
        The current state of alert for terrorist attacks in the UK is SEVERE, 
        meaning an attack is highly likely.
        The Intelligence Committee has only recently identified Russia as posing a 
        significant threat to the UK.
        The 2017 National Risk Register is the latest government publication and 
        incorrectly identifies a number of serious risks because it does not account 
        effectively for the potential impact of Brexit:
         Current risk assessments in the United Kingdom are insufficient to
        ensure safety and do not move with the rapidly changing environment.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 10 -
                 Warnings, Alerts, and Shelter...
        The warning mechanisms within the UK are not sufficient to ensure public safety 
        and appear to be reliant on mobile telephones and social media being used to 
        relay messages to the general public. Due to the ongoing and risk of future critical
        infrastructure attacks, this system serves no purpose whatsoever.
        The United Kingdom has no general awareness or practice in the use of 
        emergency sirens as public warning systems. The national siren system was 
        mostly dismantled in the 1990s.
        The National Attack Warning System, a joint venture of BT and the BBC was 
        completed in the early 2000s and is widely regarded as completely defunct.
        There is no network of public bomb shelters in the UK.
        The UK does not engage in national preparedness campaigns of which the 
        public are broadly aware. There is little local or national knowledge of what
        people should do or where people should gather or even seek communal 
        shelter.
         The UK is completely unprepared for and not engaged in a rational
        process of preparing for war or the threat of war, or any major societal
                     threat, including Brexit.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 11 -
                               BREXIT...
          The UK Government has largely failed to engage with the public on the 
          risks of Brexit, resisting most attempts to produce detailed risk assessments.
          It is now known that Brexit will produce a minimum economic effect 
          equivalent to that of the 2008 financial crisis. A no deal Brexit, in which the 
          UK would leave the European Union without any agreements would 
          produce an impact at least four times as large as this, affecting some 
          individual regions by as much as twice the national figure. But this is only 
          in terms of GDP, measured by the governments own assessments.
          Practical, or day-to-day impacts include:
             •  No access to nuclear fuel for power stations or medicine
             •  Severe impact of medical supplies
             •  Five day delays to food imports, causing food to rot in trucks on 
                the continent and generating panic buying and shortages nationally,
                leading to rationing
             •  Vehicle fuel shortages
             •  Gas and oil shortages
             •  Failure of GPS and defence systems
             •  Blockages to all imports and exports
             •  Hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic
             •  Loss of millions of jobs
             •  Loss of service sector tax revenues
             •  Flights may be grounded
          Estimates indicate the UK would survive no longer than five days on 
          internal resources in a no deal situation.
          The reality of Brexit, whatever your political view, is that it has already cost
          jobs which has started to impact upon local economies up and down the 
          country and will see a minimum degradation comparable to that of 2008.
          The government is offering no preparedness advice to any residents of the 
          UK and still does not have defined positions on how key issues such as 
          trade and essential immigration will function after March 2019.
          The general public within the UK is completely unprepared for Brexit.
                           Getting Ready Together
                                  - 12 -
                 Basic Readiness In The Home...
        Food
        It is important to keep extra food at home which provides a good calorie 
        intake. You should make sure you have non-perishable, shelf-stable food 
        which can be prepared and cooked quickly and requires little water. Food 
        which can be eaten without preparation is also ideal.
          • Potatoes, Eggs, Cabbage, Carrots
          • Long life bread – tortilla, crackers, rusks
          • Hard Cheese, Cheese and other tube-spreads
          • Milk powder, soy milk, oat milk
          • Vegetable oil
          • Quick cook pasta and rice, grains, instant mashed potatoes
          • Tinned, pre-cooked vegetables and tomoatoes
          • Tinned fish, pasta, soup
          • Fruit jams and marmalade, tinned fruit, honey
          • Coffee, Tea
          • Chocolate, energy bars
          • Nuts and seeds
        Water:
        Allow for at least three litres of water per adult in your household per day. 
        Be prepared to boil or sterilise water by chemical means. You can store tap 
        water in containers with lids and should keep stored water in a cool, dark 
        place. You can also freeze bottles – though you should not fill them to the 
        top to avoid cracking – this will also help keep your freezer cold for longer 
        if the power goes off for a prolonged period. You can line your toilet with 
        plastic bags in the event of water being switched off and dispose of the 
        contents away from your house, but good hand hygiene is essential.
          • Bottles and bottled spring water
          • Lidded buckets
          • Expandable water containers
          • Jerry cans
        Warmth:
        In a house with no heating by gas or electricity, use fireplaces where safe. 
        Where no fireplaces are present, gather in one room and use extra blankets 
        to line windows and doorways. Wear extra layers of clothing. Keep doors 
        and windows closed, even internally, but do air the room regularly to let 
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 13 -
        oxygen in. You can also use extra rugs to line the floor of your selected 
        room. Ensure you have a stock of candles and lighters or matches, but never
        leave candles or fires unattended.
          • Woollen clothes
          • Warm / outdoor clothing
          • Hats, scarves, gloves
          • Blankets
          • Sleeping bags
          • Candles and tealights
          • Matches, lighters, firelighters, survival fire starting equipment
          • LPG or paraffin stoves or heaters
          • Torches/lamps and batteries, clockwork torches
          • Fire fuel and kindling – make plans for gathering and preparing
        Communications
        Though communications networks and the internet may fail, you should be 
        prepared to be able to charge mobile devices. A variety of solar products are
        available and provide longer term solutions than power banks – unless 
        compatible with the solar charger. Clockwork or battery powered radios are 
        readily available, in order to gain access to BBC broadcast services. You 
        may also use a car radio and car charger if you have access but monitor your
        battery and fuel usage. Keep loose change in case a telephone box is still 
        present in your area.
          • Solar charger
          • Car charger adaptors
          • Clockwork / Battery powered radio
          • Loose change
        General
        You should assemble a good quality first aid kit, including bandages and 
        antiseptic creams. Ensure that you have a stock of basic medicines/ 
        additional stock of any essential prescription medicines you may need – e.g.
        insulin, test strips. Keep wet wipes and hand sanitisers for hygiene 
        purposes, along with toothpaste and mouthwash, and any other products 
        such as tampons and nappies which you may need to hand. Always keep 
        your ID documents with you, and other essentials such as insurance 
        policies/contacts should be printed out. Keep your car's fuel tank full.
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 14 -
               About This Leaflet And Doing More...
        There is nothing wrong with taking basic steps to enable you to be able to 
        look after yourself and those around you in the event of a major societal 
        event or critical incident which affects your day to day life. This leaflet is 
        little more than common sense and, in an ideal world, should have been 
        delivered to every household by the state.
        There is always more people can do to take personal responsibility for what 
        they would do. For example, learning First Aid could save a life. But the 
        options open to you are limitless. You could grow your own food, even in 
        pots, learn self-defence, join a bush-craft organisation or group.
        The reality is, with the world shifting as rapidly as it has been, you could 
        end up on your own for a lot longer than a week, so think about what you 
        need to do to be ready for that eventuality. It's never harmed anyone to be 
        over-prepared...
        Over the next few months a free preparedness resource will be built at
                    www.libertystratcom.org
        The author of this leaflet, James Patrick, is a retired police officer and 
        author who holds no political affiliation. He writes about hybrid warfare and
        cares about people. You can find his personal background in this 
        parliamentary report and make your own decisions as to whether to trust 
        him on that basis: 
        https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmpubadm/760/6
        0.pdf
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 15 -
                     Getting Ready Together
                          - 16 -
