                                                                                                                     Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                                                           
                     Subject: Aeronautical Study and Safety Assessment  Date: 19th September 2018                                                                                                Doc ID: ADIL 04/2018 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Issue Number : 1 
                      
                      
                      
                            1. CONTENTS 
                     1.       CONTENTS ................................                 ................................    ................................     ................................     ..........................    1 
                     2.       Introduction ................................                ................................     ................................    ................................     .......................    2 
                     3.       Purpose ................................             ................................     ................................    ................................     ..............................     2 
                     4.       References ................................                ................................    ................................     ................................     .........................    3 
                     5.       Applicability ................................               ................................     ................................    ................................     .......................    3 
                     6.       Objectives ................................               ................................    ................................     ................................     ..........................    3 
                     7.       A Typical Aeronautical Study Objectives ................................                                       ................................     ................................     ........... 3 
                     Appendix 1 – Checklist for Aeronautical Study ................................                                            ................................    ................................     ........ 10 
                     Appendix 2 – Hazard Log ................................                           ................................    ................................     ................................     .......... 11 
                     Appendix 3 – Risk Probability & Severity, Risk Assessment Matrix and Risk Tolerability ................................                                                                            ........ 12 
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                              Aerodrome Information Leaflets (ADIL) are issued by the QCAA for purposes of promulgating supplementary guidance 
                              materials to requirements of the Qatar Civil Aviation Regulations – Aerodromes (QCAR-ADR). They are not in themselves 
                              law  but  may  amplify  a  provision  of  the  Regulations.  They  are  intended  to  provide  practical  guidance  to  illustrate 
                              acceptable means, but not necessarily the only means, of complying with a requirement contained in the QCAR-ADR. 
                              Aerodrome Information Leaflets may explain certain regulatory requirements by providing interpretive and explanatory 
                              materials. 
                      
                     ADIL.04/2018                                                                                               19/09/2018                                                                          Page 1 of 13  
                                                                         Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                          
                  2. Introduction 
                         
             General 
              
             2.1      An aeronautical study. A study of an aeronautical problem to identify possible solutions and select a solution that is 
             acceptable without degrading safety 
              
             2.2      Safety assessment. An element of the risk management process of an SMS that is used to assess safety concerns 
             arising from, inter alia, deviations from standards and applicable regulations, identified changes at an aerodrome or when 
             any other safety concerns arise. 
                       
                      Note. — Changes on an aerodrome can include changes to procedures, equipment, infrastructures, safety works, 
                      special operations, regulations, organization, etc. 
                       
             2.3      A comprehensive aeronautical study allows the aerodrome operator/applicant and the QCAA to be convinced that 
             safety and regularity of operations of aircraft is not compromised in any way. An aeronautical study is most frequently 
             undertaken during the planning of a new airport or new airport facility, or during the certification of an existing aerodrome 
             or subsequently, when the aerodrome operator/applicant applies for an exemption, as a result of development or a change 
             in the aerodrome operational conditions from a specific provision of the QCAR-ADR 
              
             2.4      Aerodrome  operators/applicants  shall  consult  their  stakeholders,  senior  management  and  affected 
             divisions/departments  in  their  organisations  as  part  of  an  aeronautical  study.  These  consultations  allow  the  proposed 
             deviation to be viewed from different perspectives and the different parties involved would be aware of the proposed 
             deviation. The aeronautical study must be approved by the senior management of the organisation before it is submitted to 
             the QCAA for consideration of acceptance. 
                       
             2.5      Aerodrome  operators/applicants  should  note  that  QCAA  may  choose  to  participate  in  the  conduct  of  an 
             aeronautical study as an observer where appropriate. 
                       
                  3. Purpose  
              
             3.1      The purpose of this leaflet is to provide information and guidance to aerodrome operators and applicants applying 
             for an aerodrome license on the conduct of an Aeronautical Study acceptable to QCAA to demonstrate equivalent level of 
             safety where an aerodrome is unable to meet a requirement of the QCAR-ADR and need to identify alternative means to 
             achieve an equivalent level of safety.  
              
              
             3.2      The leaflet also provides information and guidance to aerodrome operators and aerodrome license holders on the 
             conduct of an Aeronautical Study in accordance with QCAR-ADR where an aerodrome is unable to meet a requirement of 
             the QCAR-ADR and need to identify alternative means to achieve an equivalent level of safety.  
              
             3.3      Paragraph 5 of this leaflet recommends and explains parts of a typical aeronautical study. By comprehensively 
             addressing all the suggested parts, the aerodrome operator should be able to complete an aeronautical study to assess the 
             viability of solutions to an aeronautical problem. An aeronautical problem may refer to an issue related to: 
                  a)  operational regulations such as lack of procedures, insufficient maintenance programs and competency issue; or 
             ADIL.04/2018                                                       19/09/2018                                           Page 2 of 13  
                                                                         Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                          
                  b)  design regulations such as terrain of object penetrating the Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS), insufficient strip and 
                      Runway End Safety Area (RESA) (dimensions and/or quality), insufficient runway/taxiway separation and lack of or 
                      wrongly designed visual aids. 
              
             3.4      Appendix 1 to this ADIL contains a suggested checklist with the requirements to be included in an aeronautical 
             study. The checklist can be used by the aerodrome operator as a guide to ascertain that all of the requirements have been 
             taken  into  consideration  and  documented  in  the  aeronautical  study.  However,  not  all  the  requirements  found  in  the 
             Appendix 1 will be applicable to every aeronautical study conducted. The aerodrome operator should therefore examine 
             each requirement carefully to determine what is applicable. 
              
                  4. References 
              
                          QCAR-ADR 
                          Doc 9981 
                          Doc 9774, 3.E & 3C.3.2 
              
                  5. Applicability 
              
             5.1      This  ADIL  applies  to  all  aerodrome  operators  licensed  aerodromes  and  applicants  applying  for  an  aerodrome 
             licence. 
              
             5.2      An aeronautical study may be carried out where aerodrome standards cannot be met as a result of development. 
             Such a study is most frequently undertaken during the planning of a new airport or during licensing of an existing airport. 
              
                  6. Objectives 
              
             6.1      An aeronautical study is conducted to:  
                  a)  assess the impact of deviations from aerodrome standards and regulations, or proposed changes;   
                  b)  present alternative solutions to ensure the level of safety of aircraft operations remains acceptable;  
                  c)  estimate the effectiveness of each alternative; and  
                  d)  recommend mitigating measures or operating procedures/restrictions or to compensate for any safety risks that 
                      have been identified due to the deviation. 
                       
                  7. A Typical Aeronautical Study Objectives 
              
             7.1      Parts of an Aeronautical Study 
                            
             7.1.1    An aeronautical study submitted to the QCAA for determination of acceptability should comprise the following 
                      parts: 
                  a)  Aim of the Study; 
                  b)  Background; 
                  c)  Safety Assessment; 
                  d)  Recommendations; 
                  e)  Conclusion;  
                  f)  Monitoring of the deviation; and review of the study 
             ADIL.04/2018                                                       19/09/2018                                           Page 3 of 13  
                                                                         Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                          
             7.2      Aim of the Study 
                            
             7.2.1    The aim of the study should be explicitly stated. It should: 
                       
                  a)  Address the safety concerns; 
                  b)  Identify safety measures to be put in place to ensure safe aircraft operations in an aerodrome; and 
                  c)  Make reference to the specific regulatory requirement which the study is meant to address. 
              
                  7.2.2    An example to illustrate this would be as follow: 
                   
                  “The aim of this aeronautical study is to address the operation of Code F aircraft in a Code 4E airport, <name of airport> 
                  and to put in place <list of safety measures> necessary to ensure safe operation of Code F aircraft in <name of airport> 
                  with reference made to <reference to QCAR-ADR regulations>…” 
              
             7.3      Background 
              
             7.3.1    Information on the current situation faced by the aerodrome operator/applicant, current procedures that have 
                      been put in place and other relevant details should be clearly stated and explained in this sub-section. Clear 
                      explanation should be provided, particularly on the following: 
              
                  a)  What is the current situation? 
                  b)  Where are the areas that will be affected by the proposed deviation? 
                  c)  When will the applicant able to comply with the specific standard if it is due to development of the aerodrome? 
                  d)  Why is there a need to review the current processes and procedures? 
                  e)  How will the proposed deviation affect the operation of aircraft at the aerodrome? 
              
             7.3.2    An example to illustrate this would be as follows: 
                       
                      “Currently, <name of airport> is Code 4E airport with some Code 4F capabilities. These Code 4F capabilities includes 
                      <list of the Code 4F capabilities>... <Name of airport> is required to handle Code F aircraft by <proposed date> and 
                      the  following  <list  of  affected  areas>  will  be  affected.  Development  of  the  <affected  areas>  is  proposed  to 
                      commence on <proposed date> and to be completed by <proposed date>. By then, <name of airport> will be 
                      upgraded to a Code 4F airport. 
                       
                      Upgrading <name of airport> from Code 4E to Code 4F airport requires the reviewing <name of processes and 
                      procedures that need to be reviewed> to ensure safe aircraft operation. 
                       
                      In addition, during this development, operation of aircraft at <name of airport> will be affected in the following 
                      ways…” 
              
             7.4      Safety Assessment 
              
             7.4.1    Safety  assessment  is  the  identification,  analysis  and  elimination,  and/or  mitigation  of  risks  to  an 
                      acceptable level of safety. This should be in accordance with the aerodrome Safety Management System 
             ADIL.04/2018                                                       19/09/2018                                           Page 4 of 13  
                                                                                Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                               
                        (SMS) that is required to be put in place by the aerodrome operator/ applicant – a key aerodrome 
                        certification requirement. A safety assessment usually consists of the following: 
                         
                   a)   Identification of hazards and consequences; and 
                   b)  Risk management. 
                         
              7.4.2     There is no standard methodology to conduct a safety assessment and it is up to the aerodrome operator/applicant 
                        to determine the appropriate methodology for each aeronautical study, depending on the size and complexity of 
                        the situation and the severity of the safety implications. However, the methodology adopted should be consistent 
                        with that established in the aerodrome operator’s/applicant’s SMS. 
                        Identification of hazards and consequences 
              7.4.3     Hazards and its consequences should be identified and recorded in a hazard log. Aerodrome operators/applicants 
                        have  to  exercise  caution  when  identifying  the  hazards  and  their  consequences  as  stating  a  hazard  as  its 
                        consequence would disguise the nature of the hazard and at the same time, interfere with identifying other 
                        important consequences. 
                         
              7.4.4     An example would be “Operation of Code F aircraft in a Code 4E airport” and “Wingtip collision in parking bays”. 
                        The former is a hazard whereas the latter is one of its consequences. The associated risks and control/mitigation 
                        measures should also be recorded in the hazard log when  information becomes available. This log should be 
                        constantly updated throughout the aeronautical study life-cycle. 
                         
              7.4.5     Appendix 2 of this ADIL contains a sample hazard log. The aerodrome operator/applicant may use this to formulate 
                        its own hazard log to suit the aeronautical study. 
                        Risk management 
              7.4.6     Risk is the assessment, expressed in terms of predicted probability and severity, of the consequence(s) of a hazard 
                        taking as reference the worst foreseeable situation. Risk management is the identification, analysis and elimination, 
                        and/or mitigation of such risk identified to an acceptable level. 
                         
              7.4.7     The probability  and  severity  of  the  consequence  identified  can  be  qualitative  or  quantitative.  The  aerodrome 
                        operator/applicant is free to use any method appropriate to the aeronautical study, but in accordance with the risk 
                        management methodology established in the aerodrome operator’s/applicant’s SMS. Some examples to assess the 
                        probability and severity of a consequence occurring are provided in the Appendix 3 of this ADIL. 
                         
              7.4.8     A risk assessment matrix should be developed. This matrix provides a relationship between the probability and 
                        severity of a consequence of a hazard occurring. The risk indexes (combinations of the risk probability values and 
                        the  risk  severity  values)  should  be  placed  in  a  risk  tolerable  table.  Appendix  3  also  gives  an  example  of  risk 
                        assessment matrix and risk tolerability. 
                               
                        a)    Intolerable – Unacceptable under the existing circumstances. 
                        b)  Tolerable – Acceptable based on risk mitigation. It may require management decision. 
                        c)    Acceptable – Acceptable as is. No risk mitigation required. 
                         
              ADIL.04/2018                                                              19/09/2018                                               Page 5 of 13  
                                                                                Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                               
                        When a safety risk assessment is due to the introduction of new  aeroplane type/model to the aerodrome, a 
                        compatibility study is conducted, as specified in QCAR-ADR 1.7 should be conducted. Following items (this list is not 
                        exhaustive) therefore shall be considered within the procedures: 
               
                         a)   Aircraft classification number 
                         b)  Taxiway width and taxiway curves 
                         c)   Electrical interferences with navigation aids 
                         d)  Location and height of mandatory and information signs 
                         e)  Taxiway and taxilane separation distance 
                         f)   Size of apron stands 
                         g)   Push-back procedures 
                         h)  Blast areas 
                         i)   Markings 
                         j)   Ground handling procedures 
                         k)   Procedures for RFF services 
               
                        Within these procedures, responsibilities shall be clearly defined, that aircraft operating or planning to operate on 
                        the aerodrome are checked with the QCAR-ADR. 
                         
              7.4.9     Risk  control/mitigation  measures  should  be  developed  to  address  the  potential  hazard  or  to  reduce  the  risk 
                        probability or severity of the consequence when the risk is classified to be tolerable to a level acceptable by the 
                        aerodrome operator. There are three broad categories for risk control/mitigation and they are as follows: 
                               
                        a)    Avoidance – the operation or activity is cancelled as the risks exceed the benefits of continuing the operation 
                              or activity; 
                               
                              An example to illustrate this would be as follow: 
                               
                              “To prohibit Code F aircraft to land or take-off from <name of airport>, which is a Code 4E airport with some 
                              Code 4F capabilities.” 
                               
                        b)  Reduction – The frequency of the operation or activity is reduced, or action is taken to reduce the magnitude 
                              of the consequences of the accepted risks; and 
                               
                              An example to illustrate this would be as follow: 
                              “To reduce the number of Code F aircraft to land or take-off from <name of airport>.” 
                               
                        c)    Segregation of exposure – Action is taken to isolate the effects of the consequences of the hazard or build-in 
                              redundancy to protect against it. 
                               
                              An example to illustrate this would be as follow: 
                               
                              “To ensure <name of airport> staff liaise with the Aeronautical Information Services (AIS) on the promulgation 
                              of aerodrome circulars with the necessary aerodrome information to <names of aircraft operators> and <names 
                              of other airports> <fixed period of time> stated in their new process and/or new procedures.” 
                         
                         
              ADIL.04/2018                                                              19/09/2018                                               Page 6 of 13  
                                                                         Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                          
             7.5      Recommendations 
                       
             7.5.1    To allow the aerodrome operator/applicant and QCAA to be convinced and assured that the proposed deviation 
                      will  not  pose  a  drop  in  the  level  of  safety,  the  aerodrome  operator/applicant  should  recommend  operating 
                      procedures/restrictions  or  other  measures  that  will  address  any  safety  concerns.  In  addition,  the  aerodrome 
                      operator/applicant  should  estimate  the  effectiveness  (through  trials,  surveys,  simulations  etc.)  of  each 
                      recommendation listed so as to identify the best means to address the proposed deviation. 
                       
             7.5.2    The recommendation includes time frames, responsibilities for mitigation measures as well as control 
                      measures  that  may  be  defined  and  implemented  to  monitor  the  effectiveness  of  the  mitigation 
                      measures. 
                       
             7.5.3    The aerodrome operator/applicant should also ensure that the affected parties are well informed of such changes. 
                      The  notification  procedure  including  process  flow,  time  frame  and  different  means  of  notification  such  the 
                      Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP) and Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) should be included in the study. 
                       
             7.5.4    An example to illustrate this would be as follow: 
                      “The following are some of the operating procedures/restrictions or other measures as well as their measured 
                      effectiveness, which could be adopted to ensure safe aircraft operations in <name of airport>: 
                      <Name of the operating procedures/restrictions or other measures and their corresponding measured effectiveness> 
                      The notification procedure to the affected parties is as follow: 
                      <Description of the notification procedure including process flow, time frame and different means of notification> 
              
             7.5.5    Risk  control/mitigation  measures  should  be  developed  to  address  the  potential  hazard  or  to  reduce  the  risk 
                      probability or severity of the consequence when the risk is classified to be tolerable to a level acceptable by the 
                      aerodrome operator. There are three broad categories for risk control/mitigation and they are as follows: 
              
             7.6      Conclusion 
                       
             7.6.1    The aerodrome operator/applicant, after taking into account all the necessary considerations listed above, should 
                      be able to summarise and conclude the results of the aeronautical study, and come to a decision on any safety 
                      measures that should be adopted. The aerodrome operator/applicant should also specify a date to put in place all 
                      the necessary safety measures and show how they maintain the same level of safety with the recommended safety 
                      measures mentioned in the aeronautical study. 
                       
             7.6.2    An example to illustrate this would be as follow: 
                      “The results of this aeronautical study have concluded that <the proposed deviation> will indeed pose a drop in the 
                      level of safety. However, by adopting <type of the safety measures>, this drop in the level of safety can be safely 
                      addressed… These safety measures will be put in place on <proposed date> to address the proposed deviation. 
                      With these safety measures put in place, <to explain how to maintain the same level of safety>...” 
              
             ADIL.04/2018                                                       19/09/2018                                           Page 7 of 13  
                                                                         Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                          
             7.7      Monitoring of the Deviation and review of the study 
                       
             7.7.1    After the completion of the aeronautical study, the aerodrome operator/applicant should monitor the status of the 
                      deviation and ensure that the implemented recommendations have been effectively carried out, and that the level 
                      of safety is not compromised at any time.  
                       
             7.7.2    The  safety  assessment  should  be  reviewed  periodically  to  identify  any  changes  in  the  safety  risks,  their 
                      acceptability, and the validity of the mitigation measures. This review should also be used to determine the validity 
                      of the aeronautical study to justify the deviation as well as its continuing need. 
                       
             7.7.3    An example would be as follow: 
                      “<Name of the aerodrome operator> will monitor the deviation’s status <fixed period of time> and ensure the 
                      safety measures has been effectively carried out and the level of safety is not compromised at any time. <Name of 
                      the aerodrome operator> will review the safety assessment process,  <fixed period of time> to determine the 
                      validity of the study to justify the deviation as well as its continuing need …” 
                       
             7.7.4    For temporary deviations, the aerodrome operator/applicant should also notify QCAA after the deviation has been 
                      corrected. 
              
             7.8      Submission of Aeronautical Study to QCAA 
              
             7.8.1    The aerodrome operator/applicant should note the guidance provided in this ADIL and use the suggested 
                      checklist  provided  in  Appendix  1  to  ensure  that  any  aeronautical  study  submitted  to  QCAA  for 
                      consideration of acceptance is thoroughly conducted and documented. 
              
             7.9      Supporting Evidence   
              
             7.9.1    Aeronautical  Study  should  include  all  details,  data  and  records  which  are  considered  to  be  related  to  the 
                      assessment process and study. 
                       
             7.9.2    As a minimum, the Aeronautical Study should include supporting evidence, safety assessments, actions, exercises 
                      to demonstrate compliance, compliance statements, inspections, tests, results from the risk management process 
                      (hazard identification, and risk assessment and mitigation processes) and aerodrome management accountability. 
                       
             7.9.3    An Aeronautical Study will only be approved (where applicable) on the basis of a robust rationale. Therefore, 
                      aeronautical  study  techniques  should  be  developed,  as  part  of  a  Safety  Management  System  (SMS),  at  the 
                      appropriate level.  
                       
             7.9.4    The responsibility for justifying, either qualitatively or quantitatively, an alternative means of compliance lies with 
                      the Aerodrome Operator. It is in the operators interest to ensure that complete and valid arguments, evidence and 
                      safety criteria are established and documented 
              
              
             ADIL.04/2018                                                       19/09/2018                                           Page 8 of 13  
                                                                     Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                      
            7.10     Checklists 
                      
            7.10.1  A suggested checklist for the reviewing of an Aeronautical Study is as shown below. Aerodrome Operators may use 
                     this checklist as a guide for developing an Aeronautical Study tailored to their individual situation. 
                      
            7.11     Record Keeping – Document Control 
                      
            7.11.1  The Aeronautical Study shall be retained for the lifetime of the system, the procedure or the activity. 
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
            ADIL.04/2018                                                   19/09/2018                                       Page 9 of 13  
                                                                        Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                        
                                       Appendix 1 – Checklist for Aeronautical Study 
              
             Note: Appendix 1 provides aerodrome operators with a suggested checklist for reviewing of an aeronautical study. An 
             aerodrome operator may use this checklist as a guide for developing an aeronautical study tailored to its individual situation. 
             The suggested checklist for reviewing of an aeronautical study is as shown below: 
              
                    Checklist For Aeronautical Study                              Yes/ No     Remarks 
              1     Aim of the study including                                                 
                    (a) Address safety concerns, 
                    (b) Identify safety measures, and  
                    (c) Make reference to specific requirement in QCAR-ADR 
              2     Consultation  with  stakeholders,  senior  management                      
                    team and divisions/departments affected;                                   
              3     The  study  is  approved  by  a  senior  executive  of  the                
                    organisation                                                               
              4     Background information on the current situation;                           
                                                                                               
              5     Proposed date for complying with the QCAR-ADR if the                       
                    deviation is due to development of the aerodrome;                          
              6     Safety assessment including                                                
                    (a) identification of hazards and consequences and  
                    (b) risk management; 
              7     The safety assessment used in the study (e.g. hazard log,                  
                    risk probability and severity, risk assessment matrix, risk 
                    tolerability and risk control/mitigation); 
              8     Recommendations              (including          operating                 
                    procedures/restrictions  or  other  measures  to  address 
                    safety concern) of the aeronautical study and how the 
                    proposed deviation will not pose a drop in the level of 
                    safety; 
              9     Estimation of the effectiveness of each recommendation                     
                    listed in the aeronautical study; 
              10    Notification  procedure  including  process  flow,  time                   
                    frame  and  the  publication  used  to  promulgate  the 
                    deviation; 
              11    Conclusion of the study;                                                   
                                                                                               
              12    Monitoring of the deviation;                                               
                                                                                               
              13    Arrangements for periodical review                                         
                                                                                               
              14    Notification to QCAA once the temporary deviation has                      
                    been corrected. 
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
             ADIL.04/2018                                                      19/09/2018                                         Page 10 of 13  
                                                                                          Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                                       
                 
                                                                       Appendix 2 – Hazard Log 
                 
                Note: Appendix 2 provides aerodrome operators with a suggested hazard log for safety assessment of an aeronautical study. 
                Aerodrome operators may use this log as a guide to formulate his own log. This log should be constantly updated throughout the 
                aeronautical study life-cycle.  
                 
                A sample hazard log for safety assessment of an aeronautical study is as shown below: 
                 
                 
                S/N      Type of        Hazard and         Consequences       Risk       Risk        Risk Control/Mitigation    Residual     Residual       Action, if any to further 
                        operation       Description          Identified      Index    Tolerability                                Risk         Risk          reduce risk(s) and the 
                           or                                                                                                    Index     Tolerability      resulting risk index and 
                         activity                                                                                                                               the residual risk 
                                                                                                                                                                  tolerability 
                1      Aircraft     Operation of          Wing        tip   3C        Tolerable     Use of wingwalkers.        2C          Tolerable       Conduct trials to study the 
                       operation    Code 4F aircraft in   collision                                 • Aircraft to taxi at                                   effectiveness   of    the 
                                    <name of airport>.    at <parking bay                           <speed value>.                                          implementation. 
                                    Code    F   aircraft  numbers>.                                 • Training of staff for                                Resulting risk index : 1C 
                                    using runway for      • Loss of control                         pushback / towing                                      Residual  risk  tolerability: 
                                    landing  and  take-   of                                        operations.                                             Acceptable 
                                    off…                  aircraft during                           • Restrictions on 
                                                          pushback /                                other aircraft 
                                                          towing                                    movements within 
                                                          operations                                <parking bay number>. 
                 
                 
                                                               
                ADIL.04/2018                                                                       19/09/2018                                                      Page 11 of 13  
                                                                            Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                           
                Appendix 3 – Risk Probability & Severity, Risk Assessment Matrix and Risk 
                                                                            Tolerability 
              
             Note: Appendix C provides aerodrome operators with a suggested risk probability & severity and risk assessment matrix to 
             be included in an aeronautical study. Aerodrome operators may use this as a guide for developing their own risk probability 
             & severity and risk assessment matrix tailored to his individual situation. 
              
              
             Risk Probability 
              
                                                                    Probability of occurrence 
              
                    Likelihood                                               Meaning                                                  Value 
                     Frequent           Likely to occur many times (has occurred frequently)                                            5 
                          
                    Occasional          Likely to occur sometimes (has occurred infrequently)                                           4 
                          
                     Remote             Unlikely to occur, but possible (has occurred rarely)                                           3 
                          
                    Improbable          Very unlikely to occur (not known to have occurred)                                             2 
                          
                    Extremely           improbable Almost inconceivable that the event will occur                                       1 
              
              
             Risk Severity 
              
                                                                      Severity of occurrence 
                    Severity                                                Meaning                                                   Value 
                 Catastrophic         — Equipment destroyed 
                                      — Multiple deaths                                                                                 A 
                                       
                                      — A large reduction in safety margins, physical distress or a workload such 
                  Hazardous           that the operators cannot be relied upon to perform their tasks accurately or 
                                      completely                                                                                        B 
                                      — Serious injury 
                                      — Major equipment damage 
                                      — A significant reduction in safety margins, a reduction in the ability of the 
                     Major            operators to cope with adverse operating conditions as a result of an increase 
                                      in workload or as a result of conditions impairing their efficiency                               C 
                                      — Serious incident 
                                      — Injury to persons 
                                      — Nuisance 
                     Minor            — Operating limitations                                                                           D 
                                      — Use of emergency procedures 
                                      — Minor incident 
                   Negligible         — Few consequences                                                                                E 
              
              
              
              
             ADIL.04/2018                                                          19/09/2018                                           Page 12 of 13  
                                                                   Aerodromes Information Leaflet 
                                                     
             
             
            Risk Assessment Matrix 
             
            Risk probability                                                 Risk severity 
                                    Catastrophic          Hazardous             Major               Minor              Negligible 
                                          A                   B                    C                   D                   E 
            Frequent 5                   5A                   5B                  5C                  5D                   5E 
            Occasional4                  4A                   4B                  4C                  4D                   4E 
            Remote 3                     3A                   3B                  3C                  3D                   3E 
            Improbable2                  2A                   2B                  2C                  2D                   2E 
            Extremely                    1A                   1B                  1C                  1D                   1E 
            improbable1 
             
             
             
            Risk Tolerability 
             
                 Risk Index             Tolerability                                   Suggested Criteria 
               3A, 4A, 4B, 5A,          intolerable       Unacceptable under the existing circumstances. 
                   5B, 5C 
               1A, 2A, 2B, 2C, 
               3B, 3C, 3D, 4C,           Tolerable        Acceptable based on risk mitigation. It may require management decision. 
               4D, 4E, 5D, 5E 
               1B, 1C, 1D, 1E,          Acceptable        Acceptable as is. No risk mitigation required. 
                 2D, 2E, 3E 
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
            ADIL.04/2018                                                  19/09/2018                                      Page 13 of 13  
