                                Simplicity: A New Language for Blockchains
                                                       Russell O’Connor
                                                 roconnor@blockstream.com
                                                          2017-12-13
                                                            Abstract
                                    Simplicity is a typed, combinator-based, functional language without
                                 loops and recursion, designed to be used for crypto-currencies and block-
                                 chain applications. It aims to improve upon existing crypto-currency lan-
                                 guages, such as Bitcoin Script and Ethereum’s EVM, while avoiding some
                                 of the problems they face. Simplicity comes with formal denotational
                                 semantics deﬁned in Coq, a popular, general purpose software proof as-
                                 sistant. Simplicity also includes operational semantics that are deﬁned
                                 with an abstract machine that we call the Bit Machine. The Bit Ma-
                                 chine is used as a tool for measuring the computational space and time
                                 resources needed to evaluate Simplicity programs. Owing to its Turing
                                 incompleteness, Simplicity is amenable to static analysis that can be used
                                 to derive upper bounds on the computational resources needed, prior to
                                 execution. While Turing incomplete, Simplicity can express any ﬁnitary
                                 function, which we believe is enough to build useful “smart contracts” for
                                 blockchain applications.
                            0    License
                            This  work is licensed    under  a  Creative  Com-
                            mons    “Attribution   4.0   International” license.
                            〈https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en〉
                            1    Introduction
                            Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies deﬁne protocols that allow large,
                            ad-hoc, groups of users to transfer value between themselves without needing
                            to trust each other or any central authority. Using public-key cryptography,
                            users can sign transactions that transfer ownership of funds to other users. To
                            prevent transactions from conﬂicting with each other, for example when one
                            user attempts to transfer the same funds to multiple diﬀerent users at the same
                            time, a consistent sequence of blocks of transactions is committed using a proof
                            of work scheme. This proof of work is created by participants called miners.
                            Each user veriﬁes every block of transactions; among multiple sequences of valid
                            blocks, the sequence with the most proof of work is declared to be authoritative.
                                                               1
