    HELP CENTER – INVOICES
    It’s a simple process to keep track of invoices and expenses
    SECTIONS
    1. View Invoices
    1. Check Account Status
    1. VIEW INVOICES
    To view the invoices for your current customer location: 
    A.  Hover your mouse over My Business at the top of any page.
    B. Click on Invoices.
                             A
                               B
    C.  Under View Invoice click Get Details.
                 C
    D.  Adjust the Start and End dates and click Search to ifnd invoices posted within a certain time period.
    E.  You can also ifnd an invoice by typing in its invoice number and clicking Search Invoices.
    F.  The different types of Invoices available are: Invoice (standard), Will Call Invoice, Vendor Ship Invoice 
      and Credit/Debit Memos.
    G.  Check the box next to the invoices you want to view. You can check multiple invoices at a time.
    H.  Checking Select All will select all of the invoices currently displayed to you.
    I.  Select the ifle format you want to view your invoice in.
    J.   Click  Download Invoices. If you selected multiple invoices, they will be packaged into a ZIP ifle. 
      You will need to unzip this ifle in order to view the invoices you downloaded. You can select and 
      download up to 50 invoices at a time.
                    I             J
     D
                   H
                   G
     E
    2. CHECK ACCOUNT STATUS
    You can view a list of all open invoices and unused credits for your currently selected customer on the 
    Check Account Status page. 
    A. Hover your mouse over My Business at the top of any page.
    B. Click on Invoices.
                              A
                               B
       C. Under Check Account Status click Get Details.
                                                                  C
       The Check Account Status page displays the following for your currently selected customer:
                                                                  ®,
       D.  Your current Accounts Receivable Balance with US Foods
       E.  A list of all open invoices and unused credits, and
       F.  Whether or not you have made a partial payment on one of the open invoices.
         D                                                 F
           E
