                      
                      
                                                   PAYING AN INVOICE 
                
                                                                
                
               This guide provides instructions on how to pay an invoice through your NMLS account.  
                
               The Invoice section of the Home tab allows a user to view outstanding invoices. Users can also 
               search for, review, pay and/or print invoices that are paid, unpaid, cancelled, or have failed 
               payment.  
                
               NMLS will restrict access for all users associated with an NMLS entity that has an unpaid or 
               failed payment invoice that has not been repaid within 30 days. The exception to this rule is for 
               an Agency Fee Invoice (AFI) that is created by the regulator. Unpaid AFIs will not restrict your 
               access to NMLS but may impact your ability to request the renewal of your license. Full access 
               will be restored when all invoices sufficiently overdue to restrict access are paid. 
                
               How to Pay an Unpaid Invoice 
               How to Repay a Failed Payment 
               How to Repay an Unpaid or Failed Payment when Restricted 
                
               How to Pay an Unpaid Invoice 
                
                   1.  Navigate to the NMLS Resource Center. 
                   2.  Click the Log in to NMLS button in the upper right corner. 
                   3.  Click the Home tab. 
                   4.  Click the Invoice link in the submenu. 
                                                                                                     
               The system displays all outstanding invoices (those in a “Failed” or “Unpaid” status). 
                
                                                                                                 
                   5.  Click the View Invoice     icon to view the details of the specific invoice. 
               Updated:  5/16/2016         Copyright © State Regulatory Registry LLC                   Page 1 of 3 
                   6.  Click the Pay Invoice button. 
                   7.  Follow the payment screens to complete the repayment process. If a payment is not 
                       completed within 15 minutes, the user will be redirected to a page preceding the 
                       payment submission section. 
                       NOTE: All NMLS transactions that are paid by credit or debit card will have a 2.5 percent 
                       service fee added to the charge. 
                        
                   8.  Submit payment by Visa, MasterCard or ACH.   
                       NOTE: If payment is made using ACH,, state licenses will contain an “ACH 
                       Payment on [payment date] – [category]” license item.The license item will 
                       automatically clear after the payment has been processed.  
                
               How to Repay a Failed Payment 
                
               If a payment fails, a system-generated notification is sent indicating that the payment has failed. 
               You are required to log in to NMLS to repay. The steps below outline this process. 
                
                   1.  Navigate to the NMLS Resource Center. 
                        
                   2.  Click the Log in to NMLS button the upper right corner. 
                        
                   3.  Click the Home tab. 
                        
                   4.  Click the Invoice link in the submenu.  
                        
                                                                                                     
               The system displays all outstanding invoices (those in a “Failed” or “Unpaid” status).  
                     
                   5.  Click the View Invoice     icon to view the details of the specific invoice. 
                 Updated:  5/16/2016         Copyright © State Regulatory Registry LLC                              Page 2 of 3 
                                 
                           6.  Click the Repay Invoice button. 
                       
                           7.  Enter Payment Information and Submit. If a payment is not completed within 15 
                                minutes, the user will be redirected to a page preceding the payment submission 
                                section. 
                                 
                                NOTE:  The system can save the same bank account or credit card information for up to 
                                15 users. The 16th user to try and save the same payment information will receive an 
                                error message. This user must choose to uncheck the save payment checkbox, or save 
                                different payment information. 
                       
                      How to Repay an Unpaid or Failed Payment when Restricted 
                       
                      If restricted, NMLS prevents a user from accessing all other pages in NMLS except the 
                      Outstanding Invoices and User Profile sections. The invoices that caused restriction have a “Y” 
                      indicator displayed under the Overdue column header. 
                       
                                                                                                                                                      
                                1.  To complete payment for the overdue invoice, click the View   icon. 
                                2.  Click the Repay Invoice button (for a failed payment) or the Pay Invoice button (for 
                                      an unpaid invoice). 
                       
                      For more information, please contact the NMLS Call Center at 1-855-NMLS-123 (1-855-665-
                      7123). 
                                 
                       
                     Updated:  5/16/2016                        Copyright © State Regulatory Registry LLC                                                       Page 3 of 3 
