                      
                      
                                                   PAYING AN INVOICE 
                
                                                                
                
               This guide provides instructions on how to pay an invoice through your NMLS account.  
                
               The Invoice section of the Home tab allows a user to view outstanding invoices. Users can also 
               search for, review, pay and/or print invoices that are paid, unpaid, cancelled, or have failed 
               payment.  
                
               NMLS will restrict access for all users associated with an NMLS entity that has an unpaid or 
               failed payment invoice that has not been repaid within 30 days. The exception to this rule is for 
               an Agency Fee Invoice (AFI) that is created by the regulator. Unpaid AFIs will not restrict your 
               access to NMLS but may impact your ability to request the renewal of your license. Full access 
               will be restored when all invoices sufficiently overdue to restrict access are paid. 
                
               How to Pay an Unpaid Invoice 
               How to Repay a Failed Payment 
               How to Repay an Unpaid or Failed Payment when Restricted 
                
               How to Pay an Unpaid Invoice 
                
                   1.  Navigate to the NMLS Resource Center. 
                   2.  Click the Log in to NMLS button in the upper right corner. 
                   3.  Click the Home tab. 
                   4.  Click the Invoice link in the submenu. 
                                                                                                     
               The system displays all outstanding invoices (those in a “Failed” or “Unpaid” status). 
                
                                                                                                 
                   5.  Click the View Invoice     icon to view the details of the specific invoice. 
               Updated:  5/16/2016         Copyright © State Regulatory Registry LLC                   Page 1 of 3 
