     NHS FIRE HAZARD DL:NHS FIRE HAZARD DL  26/11/07  17:55  Page 1
             Skin products containing
           paraffin based products, for
           example White Soft Paraffin,
          White Soft Paraffin plus 50%
          Liquid Paraffin or Emulsifying
            ointment, in contact with
            dressings and clothing are
                                                                                             Fire
           easily ignited with a naked
               flame or a cigarette.                                                       Hazard
           Keep away from fire when
               using these products
                                                                                                              With
                                                                                                          Paraffin 
                                                                                                       Based Skin
                                                                                                     Products On
                                                                                                  Dressings And
                                                                                                         Clothing
     NHS FIRE HAZARD DL:NHS FIRE HAZARD DL  26/11/07  17:55  Page 2
          f you are being treated with a                                        To stop this happening it is very
          paraffin based product, for example                                   important that you do the following:
        IWhite Soft Paraffin, White Soft                                        1.Do not smoke, use naked flames (or
        Paraffin plus 50% Liquid Paraffin or                                     be near people who are smoking or
        Emulsifying ointment, which is covered                                   using naked flames) or go near to
                                                                                 anything else which may cause a fire
        by a dressing or clothing, there is a                                    whilst these products are in contact
                                                                                 with your clothes, dressing or
        danger that smoking, or using a naked                                    bandages.
        flame could cause your dressing or                                      2.Ensure that your clothes and bedding
        clothing to catch fire.                                                  are changed regularly (preferably
                                                                                 daily) as the paraffin soaks into the
                                                                                 fabrics and can potentially be a fire
                                                                                 hazard. You should also be careful 
                                                                                 to make sure that the paraffin does
                                                                                 not soak into chairs, seating or 
                                                                                 other furniture.
                                                                                3.Tell your relatives or carers about
                                                                                 your treatment and show them 
                                                                                 this leaflet.
                                                                                4.Tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist
                                                                                 if you normally smoke. They will be
                                                                                 able to offer you help and advice to
                                                                                 stop smoking.
                                                                                Your treatment is important, but it is
                                                                                essential that you are kept safe when
                                                                                you use these products. By following
                                                                                the advice in this leaflet, you will 
                                                                                help us to make sure that you are
                                                                                treated safely.
                                                                                Please speak to your doctor, nurse or
                                                                                pharmacist if you have any questions
                                                                                about the information in this leaflet.
