                                                   Checklist for Critiquing a Novel 
                          
                          
                             ·   Conflict 
                                     o  Does your story begin with some sort of conflict—either internal or 
                                         external? 
                                     o  Does the beginning set up the bigger “conflict” of the entire novel, the 
                                         issue that drives your protagonist toward his/her end goal? 
                                     o  Is your protagonist conflicted or is embroiled in some external conflict? 
                                     o  Are there too many conflicts going on in the book? Too few? 
                                     o  Is there an overarching conflict present in the story that is key to the 
                                         premise and grows to a climax and resolution? 
                                     o  Does your protagonist face one conflict or obstacle after another (each 
                                         worse than the previous) that force him/her to have to make a tough 
                                         decision(s)? 
                                     o  Does the conflict serve the interest of the story or is it just thrown in the 
                                         book for excitement? 
                             ·   Plot 
                                     o  Does the overall plot come across clearly in the novel? 
                                     o  Is the plot goal for the book laid out from the start and does it resolve at 
                                         the end of the book satisfactorily? 
                                     o  Are there subplots in the book that work with the main plot? Are they also 
                                         resolved? 
                                     o  Are the setting, locale, time of year, date, etc., clearly and consistently 
                                         developed? 
                                     o  Is it easy to follow the passage of time from scene to scene? 
                                     o  Are the scenes strung together in a cohesive fashion and drive the plot? 
                                     o  Are there scenes in the book that do not serve the plot and don’t seem to 
                                         have a point? 
                                     o  Is the plot interesting and engaging? Are the themes and issues touched on 
                                         in the plot universal elements that readers will relate to? 
                             ·   Pacing 
                                     o  How does the pacing of the story feel? Does the book drag in spots due to 
                                         excessive narration or from uninteresting scenes? 
                                     o  Is the writing over-wordy or vague, slowing down the pace of the scenes? 
                                     o  Are sentences too long and/or repetitive? 
                                     o  Are the scenes moving at a good clip to keep interest or do they need 
                                         trimming? 
                                     o  In faster action scenes, does the pace speed up with shorter sentences and 
                                         paragraphs? 
                             ·   Tension 
                                     o  Is tension created at the outset of the book? 
                                     o  Is the protagonist compelling enough to heighten tension by the reader 
                                         caring about him/her? 
                                     o  Are scenes adeptly left hanging in order to create tension? 
                                     o  Are elements/clues/details needed to propel the story presented in a way as 
                                         to invoke tension (make the reader keep reading)? 
                             ·   Setting and Locales 
                                     o  Does the author portray a believable, interesting setting that draws the 
                                         reader in? 
                                     o  Does the setting seem to fit the mood and serve the plot? 
                                     o  Are there too many or not enough (or too repetitive) locations in the book? 
                                     o  Are any locations boring or not good choices for the scene? 
                                     o  Does the author spend too much time describing the setting? Not enough? 
                                     o  Is the setting portrayed through the eyes of the characters or presented in 
                                         flat narrative? 
                             ·   Point of View (POV) 
                                     o  Is the overall POV of the book consistent? 
                                     o  Is there only one POV character in each scene and is their “voice” distinct 
                                         from all other POVs? 
                                     o  Are there any scenes told in a POV that would be better in another POV? 
                                         (if multiple POVs in the book) 
                                     o  Does the author do a good job getting into the head of the character(s) or 
                                         do they tend to tell rather than show what he/she is thinking or feeling? 
                             ·   “Voice” 
                                     o  Does the writing style seem fresh, original? 
                                     o  Does the overall tone and style of the writing work well for the story? 
                                     o  Does the author’s voice come across unoriginal or derivative? 
                                     o  Does the writing have too many clichés or sound like the author is trying 
                                         to impress his/her audience with complex words or sentences? 
                             ·   Characters 
                                     o  Is the protagonist clearly presented and the major character in the plot? 
                                     o  Is the protagonist sympathetic from the start? 
                                     o  Are the characters rich and developed or flat and stereotypic? 
                                     o  Do the characters behave and speak consistent with their backgrounds and 
                                         upbringing? 
                                     o  Does each character have depth—a past, a need, a fear, a dream—and are 
                                         these brought out clearly in the story? 
                                     o  Do the secondary characters enhance and enrich the protagonist’s story? 
                                     o  Is there too much or not enough description of the characters? Is the 
                                         description shown from the eyes of other characters and not just “told” by 
                                         the author to the reader? 
                                     o  Are there too many characters or too much time spent on secondary 
                                         characters that detracts from the main plot of the story and the focus on the 
                                         protagonist? 
                                     o  Does the protagonist have a clear character arc that shows 
                                         growth/change/decision/resolution to the end of the book? 
                             ·   Dialogue 
                                     o  Does each characters’ speech and style of talking fit their personality? 
                                     o  Is there too much or not enough dialogue? 
                                     o  Is the dialogue stiff? Uninteresting? Too wordy? 
                                     o  Are there places where dialogue is unnecessary filler and accomplishes 
                                         little to reveal character or advance the plot (or reveal back story)? 
                                     o  Does the dialogue sound natural? 
                                     o  Are there places where the author uses dialogue to fill the reader in to 
                                         important information info dump)? 
                             ·   Overall Impressions 
                                     o  Does the book work? Does it hold together overall? Does the premise 
                                         make sense and is it engaging? 
                                     o  Is this a book with enough universal themes or topic that would draw in 
                                         readers? 
                                     o  Is the idea/premise of the book original enough to draw interest? 
                                     o  Does the book feel too long or too short? Are there scenes that seem to be 
                                         missing and what are they? 
                                     o  Does the book have a theme or point that is well delivered or does it seems 
                                         to be missing any point at all? 
                                     o  Is the theme worked into the book and brought out in the title and opening 
                                         and closing chapters? 
                                     o  Are all the plot points satisfactorily resolved at the end of the book? 
                                     o  Does the reader get a sense of completion and resolution at the end of the 
                                         book or is the ending vague, confusing, or dissatisfying? 
                                     o  Is it clear what audience the author is writing to or are there problems (for 
                                         example, a book written for young adults that might be too technical or 
                                         sophisticated for their age group, or too much sex or violence that may be 
                                         inappropriate) 
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                          
