                                                                                                                              
                        
                       Magrit, a novel by Lee Battersby (Walker Books) 
                        
                        
                       Summary 
                        
                       10-year-old Magrit has lived her whole life in a cemetery with no entrance and no exit. 
                       When the stork accidentally drops a baby into the cemetery grounds, Magrit decides to raise 
                       him as her own, despite the warnings of her skeletal best friend and advisor Master Puppet, 
                       and the ghostly voice that starts to taunt her from the area of the graveyard where Magrit 
                       never dares to go. 
                        
                       A delightfully dark fairy tale, full of Battersby's whimsy and charm.  
                       – Jody Holmes, ReadPlus 
                        
                        
                       About the Author 
                        
                       Lee Battersby is the author of several adult novels and over 70 short stories, published in 
                       Australia, the US and Europe. His work has been praised for its consistent attention to voice 
                       and narrative muscle and has resulted in a number of awards, including the Aurealis, 
                       Australia Shadows, and Australia SF Ditmar gongs. Lee lives in Mandurah, Western Australia, 
                       with his wife, writer Lyn Battersby and an increasingly weird mob of kids. He s been a stand-
                       up comic, tennis coach, cartoonist, poet, and tax officer in previous times, and he currently 
                       works as Arts Officer for a local council, where he gets to play with artists all day. Magrit is 
                       his first novel with Walker Books Australia. 
                        
                        
                       Questions for Discussion 
                        
                               What's it like to read a story told primarily about a younger character? Does it affect 
                                the way you read the work as an adult? How important is it for children's books to 
                                be written for both young boys and young girls? 
                                 
                               Death is a key theme in Magrit. How important is it for children to be aware of 
                                death? Does children’s fiction play a role in introducing it and similar themes in an 
                                accessible and enjoyable way? 
                                 
                                                                                                                            1 
