                                                                                                                              
                        
                       Magrit, a novel by Lee Battersby (Walker Books) 
                        
                        
                       Summary 
                        
                       10-year-old Magrit has lived her whole life in a cemetery with no entrance and no exit. 
                       When the stork accidentally drops a baby into the cemetery grounds, Magrit decides to raise 
                       him as her own, despite the warnings of her skeletal best friend and advisor Master Puppet, 
                       and the ghostly voice that starts to taunt her from the area of the graveyard where Magrit 
                       never dares to go. 
                        
                       A delightfully dark fairy tale, full of Battersby's whimsy and charm.  
                       – Jody Holmes, ReadPlus 
                        
                        
                       About the Author 
                        
                       Lee Battersby is the author of several adult novels and over 70 short stories, published in 
                       Australia, the US and Europe. His work has been praised for its consistent attention to voice 
                       and narrative muscle and has resulted in a number of awards, including the Aurealis, 
                       Australia Shadows, and Australia SF Ditmar gongs. Lee lives in Mandurah, Western Australia, 
                       with his wife, writer Lyn Battersby and an increasingly weird mob of kids. He s been a stand-
                       up comic, tennis coach, cartoonist, poet, and tax officer in previous times, and he currently 
                       works as Arts Officer for a local council, where he gets to play with artists all day. Magrit is 
                       his first novel with Walker Books Australia. 
                        
                        
                       Questions for Discussion 
                        
                               What's it like to read a story told primarily about a younger character? Does it affect 
                                the way you read the work as an adult? How important is it for children's books to 
                                be written for both young boys and young girls? 
                                 
                               Death is a key theme in Magrit. How important is it for children to be aware of 
                                death? Does children’s fiction play a role in introducing it and similar themes in an 
                                accessible and enjoyable way? 
                                 
                                                                                                                            1 
                               Magrit has been likened to the work of Neil Gaiman and particularly his 2008 
                                children's fantasy novel, The Graveyard Book. What are the purposes of such 
                                comparisons, do you think? Do they help you as a reader in deciding which books to 
                                read next, and why?  
                                 
                               How did you feel about Magrit’s best friend, The Puppet Master? As her only 
                                ‘parental’ character, he treads a fine line between guidance and authority. Is it 
                                possible for parents to be friends with their children, or is that not the role of the 
                                parent? 
                                 
                               Battersby has stated in interviews that he does not believe in the afterlife, and yet 
                                Magrit explores the nature of life and death in great detail in his work. What can 
                                one leave behind by which to be remembered? Is life dictated not by what we've 
                                done, but the mark we've left behind on the living? 
                                 
                               WA reviewer A. R. Levett wrote of a certain truth contained in Battersby's novel that 
                                children ‘often show older people how things really are in the world.’ How true do 
                                you find this statement? If true, what happens to adults that leads them away from 
                                such awareness? 
                                 
                               Battersby dedicates Magrit to his children Erin and Connor, ‘in the hopes that their 
                                journeys of discovery will uncover boundless wonders, and that all windows will lead 
                                to new worlds'. And yet, for adult readers, there is an extra layer of pathos to these 
                                words. How important is wonder to a life well-lived? Can wonder co-exist with more 
                                practical concerns? 
                                 
                               In Magrit, there’s a certain section of the cemetery that Magrit fears, and fears 
                                entering. What is your take on fear, its realities and falsehoods? What central fears 
                                fuel the narrative of Magrit, and are these fears applicable to you, as a reader? 
                                 
                               How important is it for children's books to educate as well as entertain? Is there a 
                                danger of such books being too didactic, alienating the very kids who are meant to 
                                read them? 
                                 
                               While it may be seen that Magrit is surrounded by cold, unkind parental figures, 
                                Battersby contends that this is necessary given the demands of fictional narrative. 
                                That in fiction, a protagonist must have something to rally against, and that, any 
                                parents (and parental figures) must be represented in a way that will increase the 
                                conflict. Is this an inherent challenge of children’s fiction? Is it possible to write a 
                                children’s novel with two sympathetic and unconditionally loving parents as key 
                                characters? 
                                 
                               What’s the difference between judgment and curiosity, as it pertains to the creation 
                                of worlds in children’s fiction? Is it possible (and indeed, commendable) to create 
                                                                                                                            2 
                                such worlds without judgment, or do kids need such delineation as they grow up in 
                                an at times puzzling or complex world? 
                                 
                               In Magrit, hope often comes from surprising places, and from characters who may, 
                                at first, seem cold, or unfeeling. Is growing to accept ‘otherness' an inherent part of 
                                maturity?  
                        
                        
                        
                       If you liked this book, you might also like… 
                        
                               Coraline by Neil Gaiman, Allen and Unwin, 2002 
                               Johnny and the Dead by Terry Pratchett, Random House, 2010 
                               Skellig by David Almond, Hodder, 2007 
                               88 Lime Street: The Way In by Denise Kirby, Scholastic Australia, 2016 
                               Where the Shoreline Used to Be: Stories from Australia and Beyond by Susan La 
                                Marca and Pam Macintyre, Penguin Australia, 2016 
                                                                                                                            3 
