                                                               UCT Invoice requirements 
                       
                      It is of critical importance that we receive valid supporting documentation, meeting all legal and tax 
                      requirements. To ensure efficient handling and payment of your invoices and improved customer service, it 
                      is essential that you refer to the mandatory legal and UCT requirements to be added to each invoice or 
                      credit note.  
                      UCT may withhold payment if a vendor’s invoice is inaccurate, or does not meet UCT’s invoice 
                      requirements or legal or tax requirements. 
                      SARS and UCT Requirements  
                                 Supplier Information 
                                      Full name of the supplier 
                                      Full address of the supplier 
                                      Telephone and fax no of the supplier 
                                      The VAT identification number of the supplier: tax registration number 
                                 Customer Information 
                                      Full name – University of Cape Town  
                                      Name, department and physical address of recipient of goods/services 
                                      The VAT registration number of UCT, please quote:  
                                       University of Cape Town - VAT NO 4540125707 
                                 Checklist of requirements that MUST appear on your invoice: 
                                      The words "Tax Invoice" clearly indicated.  
                                      The invoice number (serialised) 
                                      Date of issue of the invoice 
                                      Description of goods and/or services 
                                      The quantity of the goods/services supplied or nature of the services rendered 
                                      The price per unit (excluding VAT) of the goods/services supplied. 
                                      Taxable amount per VAT rate or exemption 
                                      The total cost of the invoice. 
                                      The UCT purchase order number on all invoices - UCT will not be held liable for payment if a 
                                       purchase order number is not quoted on the invoice.  
                                      Any discounts or rebates, not included in the unit price 
                                      VAT rate(s) applied 
                                      Total VAT amount must be shown separately on invoices and similar documents 
                                      Total Invoice Amount 
                                      Goods dispatch note number 
                                      The UCT purchase order number must appear on all invoices.  
                                 General Information 
                                      Original tax invoices must be provided. Photocopies and faxes of invoices are not allowed. 
                                      No altered invoices 
