                    
                                                                                                                                    State of California 
                                                                                                         Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
                                                                                                                                     1900 Capitol Avenue 
                                                                                                                             Sacramento, CA 95811-4213 
                                                                                                                            Email: credentials@ctc.ca.gov 
                                                                                                                                Website: www.ctc.ca.gov  
                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                BASIC SKILLS REQUIREMENT 
                    
                   The California Education Code and Title 5 Regulations specify, in most cases, that applicants for a credential, 
                   certificate, or permit to serve in the public schools of California must verify basic skills proficiency before the 
                   credential, certificate, or permit will be issued.  For Multiple and Single Subject Teaching Credential candidates, 
                   the basic skills requirement must be met prior to being assigned to daily responsibility for whole class 
                   instruction in student teaching or serving as an intern. However, institutions may require the basic skills 
                   requirement prior to program enrollment. Contact the college or university education department for more 
                   information. 
                    
                   The basic skills requirement may also be required as a condition of employment. Applicants should contact the 
                   school district where they are considering employment for more information. 
                    
                   OPTIONS FOR MEETING THE BASIC SKILLS REQUIREMENT 
                   Individuals may satisfy the basic skills requirement by one of the following methods: 
                    
                   1.  Pass the CBEST 
                   Individuals only need to pass The California Basic Educational Skills Test (CBEST) once; CBEST passing 
                   scores remain valid indefinitely for all credential and employment purposes.  To pass the CBEST, one must 
                   obtain  a minimum scad sle core of 41 in each of the three sec—tionsreading, writing, and mathematics.  
                   However, a score as low as 37 on an individual section is acceptable if the total scaled score is at least 123.  
                   Any or all sections of the CBEST can be repeated as many times as necessary to obtain a passing score, but the 
                   full registration fee is charged for each test administration. 
                    
                   Additional information and instructions for test registration and administration processes may be obtained by 
                   contacting the CBEST program. 
                    
                                                                      CBEST Program 
                                                                      Evaluation Systems group of Pearson 
                                                                      P.O. Box 340880 
                                                                      Sacramento, CA 95834-0880 
                                                                      (916) 928-4001 
                                                                      (TDD) 928-4191 
                                                                       
                                                                      Automated Information System (24 hours a day) 
                                                                           (800) 262-5080 
                                                                       
                                                                      Email: cbestmail@nesinc.com 
                                                                      Website: http://www.ctcexams.nesinc.com/  
                                                                      Please include your postal address in email messages. 
                                                                     
                    
                    
                                                                                                                                                                     
                         CL-667 2/2019                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Page 1 of 15 
