                  Bulletproofs: Short Proofs for Conﬁdential Transactions and More
                                                         ∗1                    †2               ‡1
                                        Benedikt Bunz¨     , Jonathan Bootle , Dan Boneh ,
                                                        §3                 ¶3                       k
                                     Andrew Poelstra , Pieter Wuille , and Greg Maxwell
                                                         1Stanford University
                                                     2University College London
                                                             3Blockstream
                                                                            ∗∗
                                                              Full Version
                                                                Abstract
                          We propose Bulletproofs, a new non-interactive zero-knowledge proof protocol with very
                       short proofs and without a trusted setup; the proof size is only logarithmic in the witness size.
                       Bulletproofs are especially well suited for eﬃcient range proofs on committed values: they enable
                       proving that a committed value is in a range using only 2log2pnq`9 group and ﬁeld elements,
                       where n is the bit length of the range. Proof generation and veriﬁcation times are linear in n.
                          Bulletproofs greatly improve on the linear (in n) sized range proofs in existing proposals for
                       conﬁdential transactions in Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. Moreover, Bulletproofs supports
                       aggregation of range proofs, so that a party can prove that m commitments lie in a given range
                       by providing only an additive Oplogpmqq group elements over the length of a single proof. To
                       aggregate proofs from multiple parties, we enable the parties to generate a single proof without
                       revealing their inputs to each other via a simple multi-party computation (MPC) protocol for
                       constructing Bulletproofs. This MPC protocol uses either a constant number of rounds and
                       linear communication, or a logarithmic number of rounds and logarithmic communication. We
                       show that veriﬁcation time, while asymptotically linear, is very eﬃcient in practice. Moreover,
                       the veriﬁcation of multiple Bulletproofs can be batched for further speed-up. Concretely, the
                       marginal time to verify an aggregation of 16 range proofs is about the same as the time to
                       verify 16 ECDSA signatures.
                          Bulletproofs build on the techniques of Bootle et al. (EUROCRYPT 2016). Beyond range
                       proofs, Bulletproofs provide short zero-knowledge proofs for general arithmetic circuits while
                       only relying on the discrete logarithm assumption and without requiring a trusted setup. We
                       discuss many applications that would beneﬁt from Bulletproofs, primarily in the area of cryp-
                       tocurrencies. The eﬃciency of Bulletproofs is particularly well suited for the distributed and
                       trustless nature of blockchains.
                   ∗benedikt@cs.stanford.edu
                   †jonathan.bootle.14@ucl.ac.uk
                   ‡dabo@cs.stanford.edu
                   §apoelstra@blockstream.io
                   ¶pieter@blockstream.com
                   kgreg@xiph.org
                   ∗∗An extended abstract of this work appeared at IEEE S&P 2018 [BBB`18]
                                                                    1
