                  Customers First
                 what you can expect when you
                        use council services
      Wearecommittedtodeliveringefficient and effective services to all
                    our customers in a fair and equal way.
       'CustomersFirst' is our set of standards for the level of service you
    canexpectfromus. Thestandardsalsoexplainwhatweexpectfromyou
      andwhattodoif thingsgowrong. Wewillmonitorourperformance
          against these standards to check that we are getting it right.
      This leaflet gives a summary of our customer service standards and
              contact details if you would like more information.
    Customers First
    what you can expect when you use Council services.
    Webelieve in putting our customers first, listening to their needs and
    continually improving to meet changing demands.
    Wearecommittedtowardsdeliveringefficientandeffectiveservicesfor
    the residents, businesses and visitors of the County in a fair and equal
    way. ‘Customers First’ is our set of standards for the level of service
    you can expect from us. It also explains what we expect of you and
    what to do if things go wrong. We will monitor our performance
    against these standards to check that we are getting it right.
    This leaflet gives a summary of our customer service standards which
    underpin our commitment to provide an equal service through the
    mediumof WelshorEnglish.
    Wewanttogivethebestservicewecantoeveryonewhoneedsour
    help andwelcomeyourviewsonhowwecanmakefurtherimprovements.
    Wehaveincludedsomeusefulcontactdetails at the back of this
    booklet to help you get in touch with us.
    If you or someone you know would prefer to receive this leaflet in a
    different format such as large print, on CD or electronically then please
    telephone 01492 574000 or e-mail information@conwy.gov.uk
       The following are questions that people often ask us:
        Whoareyourcustomers?
       Acustomerisanyonewhoasksusforinformation, help or advice or for
       aparticular service, whether they are local residents, businesses or
       visitors to the area.
        Whatisimportant to you when serving your customers?
       Wheneveryouhavecontactwith us, we will aim to make sure it is a
       positive experience and that you receive an excellent standard of
       service from polite, well informed and committed staff.
       Weaimtoserveallourcustomersfairlyandtothesamehighstandards
       Wewill:
       •  treat you with respect;
       •  befair and helpful;
       •  Treat you as an individual, supporting you to get the service
          you need;
       •  behave professionally;
       •  keep your business confidential; and
       •  take responsibility when dealing with you, making sure we do
          whatever we say we will do.
        Whatdoyouexpectfrommeinreturn?
       Weexpectyoutotreatuswithrespect.Wewillnottolerate harassment,
       threats or assaults on staff. We also expect you to be considerate and
       polite to other customers. We may refuse to serve you or ask you to
       leave if we think your behaviour is unacceptable.
        Whatkindof standards can I expect with Customers First?
       These are examples of targets we have set ourselves.
       •  Whenyouvisit us: you will be greeted bilingually within 5
          minutes of your arrival. Our buildings will be accessible, safe
          andpleasant to be in. If you need a private space, we will do
          our best to provide one.
       •  Whenyouphoneus:weaimtoansweryourcall,bilingually and
          within 30 seconds. If we use voice mail, we will check it
          regularly. If you ask us to call you back, we aim to do this by
          the end of the next working day.
       •  Whenyouwritetous:wewill aim to reply within 15 working
          days in the language of your choice. If it is not possible to give
          you a full answer within this time, we will tell you why and how
          long it will be before we can give you a full answer.
       •  Whenwewritetoyou:wewilluseclear, plain language,
          avoiding jargon, in the language and format of your choice.
          Wewill tell you clearly if there is anything you need to do and give
          you suitable contact details.
       •  If we visit you at home: we will arrive for appointments on time
          or try to let you know if we are delayed by more than 15 minutes.
          Wewill show you an identification card, give our name and
          treat you and your home with respect.
        I have additional needs – will I still get an equal service?
       If you have a disability – that affects the way you can access or use
       our service, we will discuss with you the best way to help you.
       If you have a hearing or communication difficulty – we can arrange for
       aBritish Sign Language interpreter or other communicator to help you.
       You can also contact us by telephone using the BT text relay service.
       If you do not speak Welsh or English – you can use your own
       interpreter or if you prefer, we can arrange an interpreter for you.
        Whatif I feel my contact with you does not meet these standards?
       If you think something has gone wrong, we want to know so that we
       cantry to put it right. First, it is always best to speak to the person
       directly involved (for example, ask to speak to the supervisor or duty
       manager). In most cases, we can deal with the matter easily in this way
       andnofurther action will be needed.
       If we cannot deal with the matter at this stage, ask about our easy to
       use complaints procedure. Please see contact details at the end of
       this leaflet.
        HowcanImakesureyouwilltakeaccountof myviews?
       Wewill regularly ask people what they think of our services, including
       those provided by organisations working on our behalf. We often
       provide comments cards or books for you to say what you think of our
       services. You can also comment through your county councillor and on
       our website at www.conwy.gov.uk/comments.
       Wewillusewhatyoutellustohelpusimproveourservices:if wearenot
       able to make the changes you have suggested then we will tell you why.
        HowcanIfindoutmoreabouttheservicestheCouncilprovides?
       Wepublish a full range of information leaflets and booklets about us
       andtheservices we provide, including:
       •  Customers First – Our Charter for Service Standards;
       •  Compliments and Complaints – How to contact Conwy.
       These leaflets and other information are available from our main
       reception areas and at all local libraries (visit www.conwy.gov.uk/libraries).
       OurCouncil website - www.conwy.gov.uk and our digital TV channel
       also have lots of information, including some self-service forms and
       details about who to contact for further assistance. The website also
       has downloadable copies of some of our leaflets. You can access the
       internet free of charge at any of our libraries.
       You can also go to www.conwy.gov.uk/customerfirst for more
       information about customer care in Conwy.
        Contacting Conwy County Borough Council is easy.
        E-mail and Internet:
       All our services can be contacted by email. Our Council A – Z has
       details or you can contact us or report things directly using one of our
       on-line forms.
        www.conwy.gov.uk/a-z       Analphabeticallist containing contact
                                   details for our services
        www.conwy.gov.uk/contactus Send us a question, a comment, a
                                   compliment or a complaint
        www.conwy.gov.uk/tellus    Tell us about a problem
        www.conwy.gov.uk/shortcuts Popular shortcuts to our service’s
                                   webpages
        Telephone:
       For general enquiries, call our main switchboard on 01492 574000.
       If you have a hearing difficulty and wish to use the free, BT text relay
       service then just add 18001 in front of any of our telephone numbers.
       The office hours are 8.45am to 5.15pm Monday to Thursday, and
       8.45amto4.45pmonFridays.
       Out-of-hours emergency contact numbers:
       •  Emergencyroadmaintenance: 01248 680033
       •  Other emergencies or Careline: 01492 515777
       For the telephone numbers of our main services, please see our
       advert in the Phone Book or refer to the pull-out A – Z section in your
       Council Tax information booklet.
    Write to:-
    ConwyCountyBoroughCouncil
    Bodlondeb,
    Bangor Road
    Conwy, LL32 8DU
    I want to make a complaint
    If you are unhappy with the service you have received from any of our
    services and you wish to complain, you can make your complaint to
    any memberof staff or directly to our Corporate Information &
    Complaints Service.
    Write to the Corporate Complaints Monitoring Officer at the
    address above.
    Telephone: 01492 576070
    E-mail: cssc@conwy.gov.uk for Social Services complaints or
    E-mail: complaints@conwy.gov.uk for all other complaints.
