                                                                                          AP Detailed Procedure 
                                                                       Matching an Invoice to a Purchase Order 
                Matching an Invoice to a Purchase Order 
                When you enter a supplier invoice for which a CUFS purchase order was raised, you should 
                match it to the order to remove the commitment from your departmental accounts. 
                 
                Copies of certain invoices relating to grants will need to be sent on a weekly basis to the 
                departments contact in the Research Operations Office with the RG number clearly marked 
                on the invoice.  Departments will be advised as to which invoices they require copies off. 
                Pre-requisites: 
                       Your purchase order must have been generated on CUFS; 
                       The purchase order must be approved and open; 
                       The invoice must be for the same supplier and currency as the purchase order. 
                 
                 
                    Transfer          Review how         Match to the       Check Assets         Validate 
                   details from       the invoice is         PO             and Calculate 
                  the invoice to       to be paid                                Tax 
                   the system                             
                                                                             
                 
                 
                Step 1          Transfer invoice details to the system                                         
                                                                                                            
                 
                a.    Create a batch using the standard                                                        
                      batch naming convention 
                       
                b.    In the invoices window, the 
                      invoice type stays as Standard. 
                       
                c.    Complete the PO number                The system will insert the details of the          
                                                            relevant supplier from the purchase order.         
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
                d.    Enter the following information       ~ invoice date 
                      from the invoice:                     ~ invoice number                                        
                                                            ~ total invoice amount 
                                                            ~ total VAT Control Amount 
                                                            ~ description 
                                                             
                e.    Leave the Match Action field as       Purchase Order                                     
                      the default 
                 
                                                                                                               
                 
                Version1:0                                                                               Page 1 of 4 
                                                                                         Detailed Procedure 
                                                                   Matching an Invoice to a Purchase Order 
                
               Step 2         Review how the invoice will be paid
                                                                                                      
                
               a.    Review how the invoice will be      ~Payment terms                                  
                     paid:                               ~Payment methods 
                                                         ~Pay Groups 
                                                         ~Pay Alone check box 
                                                          
                                                                                                         
               Step 3         Match to the Purchase Order
                                                                                                      
               a.    Click on the                                                                           
                     Match button  
                      
                                       
               b.    Ensure that the 
                     PO number 
                     appears in the 
                     Num field. 
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
               c.    Click on Find                                                                          
                
               d.    The matching window will open.      This displays the item lines from the           
                                                         purchase order. 
                                                          
               e.    Tick the Match box for each                                                         
                     order line that you wish to match 
                     to the invoice. 
                      
               f.    Compare against the invoice and     The default values are from the order.          
                     amend if necessary:                                                                 
                                                         To match correctly, the quantities and 
                     ~Qty invoiced                       amounts must reflect what appears on the             
                     ~Unit price                         invoice; therefore you may need to overtype 
                                                         some of the fields here. 
                                                          
               Version1:0                                                                          Page 2 of 4 
                                                                                                        Detailed Procedure 
                                                                              Matching an Invoice to a Purchase Order 
                   
                                                                                                                                 
                        Note:                                                                                             
                                                                                                                          
                        If Freight was missed off the original purchase order then you can tick the Freight/Misc 
                        box, but only for one of the lines it relates to.  You can then prorate the freight once you            
                        have completed the match process, which is covered later in the manual.                           
                                                                        
                  g.    Click the Match button.                    You will return to the invoice window ready            
                                                                   for the next step. 
                   
                   
                  Step 4           Review Lines, Check Assets and Calculate Tax
                                                                                                                               
                  a.      Click on the Lines tab, and the 
                          system will have automatically 
                          created the item/s for you, based 
                          upon what was entered on the 
                          purchase order, with the relevant 
                          tax code and description. 
                           
                          It will not have calculated VAT. 
                           
                          Tick the Track As Asset box if an 
                          item is a fixed asset. 
                           
                                                                                                                                     
                  b.      If the item is a fixed asset, scroll        
                          along to complete the relevant 
                          fixed asset fields. 
                           
                           
                           
                                                                                                                               
                                                                      
                           
                  Version1:0                                                                                        Page 3 of 4 
                                                                                              Detailed Procedure 
                                                                       Matching an Invoice to a Purchase Order 
                c.      Save then click Calculate Tax.  If    If you fail to remember to click the Calculate     
                        you want to see the account           Tax button your totals will not equal.  
                        codes for the item line/s, click on 
                        the All Distributions button.   
                         
                d.      Click on the General tab and                                                             
                        check that the total figure isn’t in                                                   
                        red!   
                         
                        If you have Calculated Tax and the totals still don’t agree then this could be due to:  
                                                                                                                      
                        ~the invoice relates to more than one order; 
                        ~there is an item on the invoice that wasn’t on the order e.g. a delivery charge 
                        ~there is a tax-rounding error 
                        ~the wrong VAT rate was used on the order 
                        ~some other mistake 
                         
                e.      Close the distributions window and validate the invoice in the normal way via            
                        Actions … 1. 
                 
                Version1:0                                                                                Page 4 of 4 
