                Strategy      Government of Canada Bond Futures
                Futures invoice spread
              Invoice spread transactions allow investors to express an opinion on the perceived credit risk of two ﬁnancial debt 
              instruments (for example, a sovereign government bond and an interest rate swap). A widening invoice spread 
              reﬂects a perceived increase of credit risk. A narrowing invoice spread reﬂects a perceived diminishing of credit risk.
              The futures invoice spread strategy is based on the forward-starting interest rate swap that begins on the last 
              delivery date of the futures contract and ends at the maturity date of the underlying cash bond (the cheapest-to-
              deliver bond or CTD). The spread represents the difference between the ﬁxed rate of the swap for the same maturity 
              and the yield of the bond futures’ CTD. Futures invoice spreads can be traded on-exchange through an Exchange for 
              Risk (EFR) facility.
              Government bond asset swap spread exposure can be achieved cost efﬁciently using interest rate futures instead 
              of cash bonds. To initiate a long/short position in the bond futures market, only an initial margin is required. Bond 
              futures, such as the CGB contract, also have a narrower bid/ask spread than that of the underlying cash bond 
              market. Furthermore, bond futures contracts are a great alternative to investors who cannot short bonds or foreign 
              investors that don’t have easy access to the Canadian government bond market. Futures contracts also eliminate 
              the need to do any ﬁnancing transactions in the repo/reverse repo market.
              Invoice spread analysis – two strategy examples
              Hedging a forward interest rate swap with CGB contracts
              Bloomberg’s futures invoice spread analysis (IVSP) function calculates the forward bond futures yield against 
              a corresponding forward-starting interest rate swap so that investors can evaluate potential invoice spread 
              transactions. The IVSP analytics function can also be used to determine the number of CGB contracts required to 
              hedge a notional amount of $10 million of forward interest rate swaps. In this analysis, we used the CGB June 2012 
              contract and the CTD reference bond is the Can 3½% June 1, 2020 bond.
              Cont’d... >>
