                               ONTHEELECTRODYNAMICSOFMOVING
                                                              BODIES
                                                          ByA.EINSTEIN
                                                            June 30, 1905
                                 It is known that Maxwell’s electrodynamics—as usually understood at the
                              present time—when applied to moving bodies, leads to asymmetries which do
                              not appear to be inherent in the phenomena. Take, for example, the recipro-
                              cal electrodynamic action of a magnet and a conductor. The observable phe-
                              nomenon here depends only on the relative motion of the conductor and the
                              magnet, whereas the customary view draws a sharp distinction between the two
                              cases in which either the one or the other of these bodies is in motion. For if the
                              magnet is in motion and the conductor at rest, there arises in the neighbour-
                              hood of the magnet an electric ﬁeld with a certain deﬁnite energy, producing
                              a current at the places where parts of the conductor are situated. But if the
                              magnet is stationary and the conductor in motion, no electric ﬁeld arises in the
                              neighbourhood of the magnet. In the conductor, however, we ﬁnd an electro-
                              motive force, to which in itself there is no corresponding energy, but which gives
                              rise—assuming equality of relative motion in the two cases discussed—to elec-
                              tric currents of the same path and intensity as those produced by the electric
                              forces in the former case.
                                 Examples of this sort, together with the unsuccessful attempts to discover
                              any motion of the earth relatively to the “light medium,” suggest that the
                              phenomena of electrodynamics as well as of mechanics possess no properties
                              corresponding to the idea of absolute rest. They suggest rather that, as has
                              already been shown to the ﬁrst order of small quantities, the same laws of
                              electrodynamics and optics will be valid for all frames of reference for which the
                                                                1
                              equations of mechanics hold good.   We will raise this conjecture (the purport
                              of which will hereafter be called the “Principle of Relativity”) to the status
                              of a postulate, and also introduce another postulate, which is only apparently
                              irreconcilable with the former, namely, that light is always propagated in empty
                              space with a deﬁnite velocity c which is independent of the state of motion of the
                              emitting body. These two postulates suﬃce for the attainment of a simple and
                              consistent theory of the electrodynamics of moving bodies based on Maxwell’s
                              theory for stationary bodies. The introduction of a “luminiferous ether” will
                              prove to be superﬂuous inasmuch as the view here to be developed will not
                              require an “absolutely stationary space” provided with special properties, nor
                                 1The preceding memoir by Lorentz was not at this time known to the author.
                                                                    1
