                                      ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
       No.                                    INVOICE PAYMENT FORM
           Date Requested             Date Due          Travel Expense Report #      If to be picked up at Cashier’s Office, by
                                                             (if applicable)                        whom:
            Invoice Type        Supplier Invoice Date       Supplier Invoice                 Supplier Invoice Total
                                                                Number
              Standard
       1) Has the supplier been set up in Accounts Payable?  If yes, provide the supplier number and name below.  If no, please complete an
       Oracle Supplier Set-up Form and forward to Accounts Payable with the Invoice Payment Form.  If the payment is for taxable servcei s, the
       social security number must be provided before the payment can be processed.  2) Is the supplier an employee of RIT?  Use thisfo rm for
       reimbursements only.  Complete an Additional Pay Form for payments to an employee above his/her base salary.
       Supplier Number         Social Security Number Supplier Name  (Enter the name of vendor.  For employee reimbursements
                               (for taxable services)   or travel advances, enter the employee’s name.)
       DISTRIBUTION:
       Line                     Account Number                              Amount                 Note: Travel Advances
       1                                                                                           are limited to $50.00
                                                                                                   per day. Indicate the
                                                                                                   duration (number of
       2                                                                                           days) of the trip in the
                                                                                                   “When?” box below.
                                                                                                   The Travel Expense
       3                                                                                           Report number must be
                                                                                                   indicated in the box at
                                                                                                   the top of the page.
       The following information section must be completed.  If additional space is required, please include an attachment.  Submit
       ORIGINAL RECEIPTS with this form to Accounts Payable.  If the request is an advance, include a memo of explanation.
       Line                    Business Purpose                       When?                   Where?
       1
       2
       3
        Requestor’s Signature           Extension              E-Mail Address                  Approver’s Signature
       Accounting Use Only:
               Batch Name                Pay Group                   Status                       Accounting Approval
       Revised 11/99
                                                   Instructions for Completing Invoice Payment Form
         1.   Date Requested—Enter the date the form is being prepared.
         2.   Date Due—Enter the date by which the invoice should be paid according the supplier’s terms.  RIT’s standard payment terms are 30
              days from the supplier invoice date.  Employee expense reimbursements are processed with payment terms of “immediate”.  If the
              supplier offers a discount for early payment, highlight the date due box and indicate “disc”.
         3.   Travel Expense Form—Indicate travel expense form number if the payment is a travel advance.  Travel advances are limited to
              $50.00 per day.  Indicate the duration of the trip in the Business Purpose Section.  Travel advances are charged to
              01.15199.09050.00.00000.00000 when processed in Accounting.  When the completed Travel Expense Report is returned to
              Accounting, the actual expenses will be to your department.
         4.   If to be picked up at Cashier’s Office—Enter the name of the individual who will be picking up the check.  Checks are filed under
              the individuals last name.  Employee reimbursement checks will be mailed to the employee’s home address.
         5.   Invoice Type—Standard
         6.   Supplier Invoice Date—Enter the date indicated on the supplier’s invoice.  Complete one form per supplier invoice.
         7.   Supplier Invoice Number—Enter the number indicated on the supplier’s invoice.
         8.   Supplier Invoice Total—Enter the total amount due to the supplier.  Include shipping and handling charges if applicable.  If the
              supplier charged sales tax, do not include that amount in the total.  Do not calculate early payment discounts.
         9.   Supplier Number—Enter the supplier number if known.
         10.  Supplier Name—Enter the name of the supplier.  This is the name that will appear on the check.  If the check is an employee
              expense reimbursement, enter the employee’s full name.
         11.  Distribution—Account Number—Enter the account number(s) to charge for the expense.  If the request is for a travel advance, the
              amount will be charged to an Institute prepaid account, not to the department’s account.  When the Travel Expense Report is
              received, the actual expense amount will be charged to the department’s account (see #3 Travel Expense Form above.)
         12.  Distribution—Amount—Enter the amount to be paid.
         13.  Business Purpose—Describe the business purpose.  For example, “purchase supplies for class demonstration”, or “lunch to discuss
              fund departmental reorganization”.  Provide names of lunch or dinner attendees if applicable.  Line 1 in this section should
              correspond to Line 1 in the Distribution section above.  For travel advances, include the destination and purpose of the trip.
         14.  When—Indicate the date the transaction occurred.  If the request is for a travel advance, indicate the duration of the trip (i.e. 11/15-
              11/20—6 days x $50.00/day = $300.00)
         15.  Where—Indicate the location where the business transaction occurred.
         16.  Requestor’s Signature—The individual who prepared the Invoice Payment Form should sign in this box.
         17.  Extension—Indicate the telephone extension of the preparer.  Accounts Payable may contact the preparer if there are questions
              regarding the payment.
         18.  E-Mail Address—Indicate the e-mail address of the preparer.  Accounts Payable may contact the preparer if there are questions
              regarding the payment.
         19.  Approver’s Signature—The department head or budget authority should sign in this box.
         20.  Accounting Use Only—Do not complete any of the boxes in this section.
         Forward the completed form with the appropriate documentation to Accounts Payable for processing.   Documentation
         requirements: Original receipts are required for all reimbursements.  If there is more than one receipt, please tape to an 8 ½ x 11 sheet of
         white paper.  Please include a memo of explanation when requesting advance payments or other items for which there are no
         receipts or a supplier invoice.
         Revised 11/99
