                                                                                                                               
             
            Diet advice and bowel 
            preparation for your 
            colonoscopy 
             
            The aim of this information sheet is to help answer some of the questions you may have 
            about how to prepare for your colonoscopy investigation. 
             
            Please read this leaflet thoroughly at least four days before your appointment due to 
            medications that need to be stopped. If after reading, you have any further questions or 
            concerns, please do not hesitate to speak to a doctor or nurse caring for you. 
             
            What is a colonoscopy? 
            This is where a soft, flexible tube with a camera at the end is passed through your back 
            passage (anus) and up inside your bowel by a specially trained doctor or nurse. You should 
            have received the leaflet, Having a colonoscopy, which explains the procedure in more 
            detail. If you have not received a copy of this, please ask us for one. 
             
            Why do I need to prepare for this procedure? 
            Your bowel needs to be empty for the colonoscopy, so that the doctor or specialist nurse can 
            see the lining of your bowel. To achieve this you will need to alter your diet and take specific 
            preparations for a few days before the procedure. These changes are explained in this leaflet.    
             
              Please tell the nursing staff as soon as possible on the number at the end of the leaflet if 
              you 
                •   are taking any medicines to thin the blood or to prevent blood from clotting 
                    (anticoagulants or antiplatelets, such as warfarin, rivaroxaban or clopidogrel). You do 
                    not need to call if you only take aspirin 
                •   have diabetes and are on insulin 
                •   have any allergies to any medicines.  
                •   you are allergic to latex 
                 
              Please let us know if you are taking any regular medicines at your pre-assessment 
              appointment (including anything you buy yourself over the counter or any herbal or 
              homeopathic medicines).  
               
              If any of the above applies to you, you may need special instructions. 
               
              If your health has deteriorated since seeing the doctor or specialist nurse in clinic please 
              call the endoscopy nurses for advice on 020 7188 7188 ask for extension 54059 (St 
              Thomas’ Hospital) or 020 71887188 extension 53499 (Guy’s Hospital).                                              
            1 of 9                                                                                                                  
