            Leaflet of  documents required for your business travel purpose. 
            It is strongly recommended to submit a complete set of documents as per the below list of requirements in order to avoid 
            delays in visa processing. 
            Business travel: visiting a business/company to have meetings, to make business deals, to recruit, to train or other     
            work related activities. 
            Business visa travel purpose has to be confirmed by an invitation letter from a business/company based in Germany. 
            The decision to approve or refuse a visa is entirely up to the Diplomatic Mission. Please note: the Diplomatic Mission might 
            request you to submit missing / additional documents that may prolong the review time.  
            All documents have to be recent, not older than 1 month, and need to be provided for every Schengen visa application.  
            Applicants always have to bring and present their original documents also submit with the photocopies. 
            For Minors, please сheck the separate leaflet. 
                   nted Visa Application form (original)
            •   Pri
                All pages of the online application form need to be printed out.  Please sign the form in 3 designated places.
            •   Additional Information sheet (original)
                Document needs to be printed out, signed and submitted along with the visa application and its additional documents.
            •   Passport (original and 2 photocopies)
                Signed passport, at least 2 blank pages for visa purposes, must be valid for at least 90 days beyond the return date of
                the trip to the Schengen Area.
                (Extended passport may still be valid, but when older than 10 years the passport is no longer acceptable; in that case
                applicant first needs to apply for a new passport.)
            •   UK Residence permit (original and photocopy)
                UK Residence permit, endorsed in the passport or issued as a Biometrics card, must be valid for at least 90 days beyond
                the return date of the trip to the Schengen Area; C type visitor visa is not acceptable.
            •   Biometric Photograph (original)
                1 recent colour photograph, not more than 6 months old, on white or off-white background.
            •   Proof of occupation
                   o   Employer letter (original): recent (less than 1month), signed (not electronic), headed letter (addressed to the
                       Mission, name and position of the signee and confirming duration of employment, business relations with
                       German company, travel purpose, duration of business trip(s) and if applicable a guarantee to cover all travel
                       expenses including travel health insurance)
                o     Self- employment letter(original): recent (less than 1 month old), signed, headed letter(addressed to the
                      Mission, name and position of the signee and confirming applicant’s self-employment) and obtained from (if
                      applicable):
                  Applicant’s accountant (when applicant’s company’s accountancy is done by an external/independent accountant or HM 
                  Revenue & Customs 
            •   Invitation letter
                     A recent signed official invitation letter in PDF, on official company letterhead from business partner in Germany 
                     confirming the kind of business relations, travel purpose, duration of business trip(s) and if applicable, a 
                     confirmation to cover travel expenses and costs of stay occurring 
                            If presenting at a conference, invitation letter should indicate this also. 
            •   Proof of funds (if company is not covering expenses)
                     Latest 3 months UK current account bank statements showing applicant’s name, address and an end balance dated 
                o    within the last month on the visa application submission date. The balance should show at least 40 £ a day for the stay 
                     in Schengen area. Online bank account printouts are also accepted. If the bank statement is printed out online from the 
                     bank account, a stamp of any of the bank branches is still necessary.
                o    This sum has to also include the cost of tickets and accomodation (if not payed).
                o    Travellers’ cheques are also accepted if covering at least 40 £ a day for the stay in Schengen area.
            •   Proof of travel (airplane, train, boat, coach, car)
                o   Confirmed return travel tickets: mentioning applicant’s name and travel dates to & from the Schengen Area
            •   Proof of accommodation (If company is not covering accommodation)
                o    Confirmed accommodation (hotel, hostel, camping, …) reservation mentioning applicant’s name, travel dates and
                     accommodation address details.
                       If the applicant’s name is not mentioned on the accommodation reservation, then a joint travel confirmation 
                      letter, signed and dated by the person whose name is on the reservation, must also be provided along with a 
                      photocopy of that same person’s passport/ID card + passport signature page, if signature is not on passport’s bio 
                      page. 
                       When accommodation is reserved for a group, then a list with the names of the group members will also be 
                      required; alternatively the group members their names may also be mentioned on the travel ticket 
            •   Travel insurance (all-risk medical travel insurance)
                o    The travel insurance – issued in UK or Germany and showing applicant’s name- has to be valid throughout the
                     complete territory of the Schengen Area and must cover the entire period of the applicant’s intended stay in the
                     Schengen Area; the minimum coverage for medical emergency and repatriation (in case of death clause included)
                     must be 30,000 €.
        VisaMetric Group 
