                                                            Forest Insect
                                                            & Disease
                                                            Leaflet 183
                                                            Revised August 2017
                 U.S. Department of Agriculture   •   Forest Service
                                     Goldspotted Oak Borer
                             1            2            3               4            5                   6
               T.W. Coleman , M.I. Jones , S.L. Smith , R.C. Venette , M.L. Flint , and S.J. Seybold
            The goldspotted oak borer (GSOB), 
                                                              New Mexico, and southwestern Texas.  
                                                              Specimens of GSOB have only been 
            Agrilus auroguttatus Schaeffer 
            (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) (Figure  collected from Arizona, California, 
            1), is a lfatheaded phloem- and wood              and Mexico.  In southeastern Arizona, 
                                                              GSOB feeds primarily on Q. emoryi, 
            borer that infests and kills several 
            species of oak (Fagaceae: Quercus) in             and silverleaf oak, Q. hypoleucoides A. 
                                                              Camus (both Section Lobatae).  Larval 
            California.  One or more populations 
            of GSOB were likely introduced via                feeding injures the phloem and outer 
            infested  ifrewood  into  San  Diego              xylem of these red oak species, with 
                                                              most feeding activity and occasional 
            County, California from the native 
                                                              cases of tree mortality noted in large-
            range in southeastern Arizona.  Since 
            its introduction to California, GSOB 
            has expanded its range and has killed 
            red oaks (Quercus Section Lobatae) 
            nearly continuously across public and  
            private lands (Figure 2).
            Distribution and Hosts
            The native distribution of GSOB likely 
            coincides with that of Emory oak, Q. 
            emoryi Torrey, including the Coronado             Figure 1.  Adult goldspotted oak borer, Agrilus 
            National Forest in southeastern 
            Arizona      and    lforistically    related      auroguttatus,  an exotic insect threatening red 
                                                              oaks in Californi(Adults ara e approximately 
                                               southern       0.35 inches long by 0.08 inches wide).
            regions in northern Mexico, 
            1
             Entomologist, USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Protection, San Bernardino, CA; 
            2Entomologist, Dept. of Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse University, 
                            3
            Syracuse, NY;  Entomologist, USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Protection, 
            Susanville, CA; 4Research Biologist, USDA Forest Service, Northern Research Station, 
            St. Paul, MN; 5Entomologist, Dept. of Entomology and Nematology and Statewide 
                                                                                               6
            Integrated Pest Management Program, University of California, Davis, CA;  Research 
            Entomologist, USDA Forest Service, Paciifc Southwest Research Station, Davis, CA. 
