                                                            Forest Insect
                                                            & Disease
                                                            Leaflet 183
                                                            Revised August 2017
                 U.S. Department of Agriculture   •   Forest Service
                                     Goldspotted Oak Borer
                             1            2            3               4            5                   6
               T.W. Coleman , M.I. Jones , S.L. Smith , R.C. Venette , M.L. Flint , and S.J. Seybold
            The goldspotted oak borer (GSOB), 
                                                              New Mexico, and southwestern Texas.  
                                                              Specimens of GSOB have only been 
            Agrilus auroguttatus Schaeffer 
            (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) (Figure  collected from Arizona, California, 
            1), is a lfatheaded phloem- and wood              and Mexico.  In southeastern Arizona, 
                                                              GSOB feeds primarily on Q. emoryi, 
            borer that infests and kills several 
            species of oak (Fagaceae: Quercus) in             and silverleaf oak, Q. hypoleucoides A. 
                                                              Camus (both Section Lobatae).  Larval 
            California.  One or more populations 
            of GSOB were likely introduced via                feeding injures the phloem and outer 
            infested  ifrewood  into  San  Diego              xylem of these red oak species, with 
                                                              most feeding activity and occasional 
            County, California from the native 
                                                              cases of tree mortality noted in large-
            range in southeastern Arizona.  Since 
            its introduction to California, GSOB 
            has expanded its range and has killed 
            red oaks (Quercus Section Lobatae) 
            nearly continuously across public and  
            private lands (Figure 2).
            Distribution and Hosts
            The native distribution of GSOB likely 
            coincides with that of Emory oak, Q. 
            emoryi Torrey, including the Coronado             Figure 1.  Adult goldspotted oak borer, Agrilus 
            National Forest in southeastern 
            Arizona      and    lforistically    related      auroguttatus,  an exotic insect threatening red 
                                                              oaks in Californi(Adults ara e approximately 
                                               southern       0.35 inches long by 0.08 inches wide).
            regions in northern Mexico, 
            1
             Entomologist, USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Protection, San Bernardino, CA; 
            2Entomologist, Dept. of Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse University, 
                            3
            Syracuse, NY;  Entomologist, USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Protection, 
            Susanville, CA; 4Research Biologist, USDA Forest Service, Northern Research Station, 
            St. Paul, MN; 5Entomologist, Dept. of Entomology and Nematology and Statewide 
                                                                                               6
            Integrated Pest Management Program, University of California, Davis, CA;  Research 
            Entomologist, USDA Forest Service, Paciifc Southwest Research Station, Davis, CA. 
            Figure 2.  Aerially mapped oak mortality (red stippling) associated with the goldspotted oak 
            borer in San Diego County in southern California (2002-2013).  Disjunct infested areas (satellite 
            populations indicated by ●) occur in San Diego County (San Diego); Riverside County (Idyllwild) 
            and Orange County (Orange). 
            diameter trees [>17 inches in diameter facilitated the dispersal of GSOB in 
                                                                                     southern California and will likely 
            at breast height (dbh)].  A sibling 
            species, the Mexican goldspotted oak                                     continue to play a role in its future 
            borer, A. coxalis Waterhouse, is native                                  dispersal in California and beyond.
            to central and southern Mexico and 
            Guatemala, and was once synonymized                                      In California, GSOB preferentially 
                                                                                     attacks and kills large-diameter coast 
            with  A. auroguttatus.  Surveys have 
                                                                                     live oaks, Q. agrifolia Née, and 
            shown that Mexican GSOB feeds on 
                                                                                     California black oaks, Q. kelloggii 
            both red oaks and white oaks (Section 
            Quercus) in southern Mexico.                                             Newberry (>18 and 20 inches dbh, 
                                                                                     respectively).  Interior live oak, Q. 
            In 2004, GSOB was ifrst detected in                                      wislizeni A. DC., another red oak 
            survey traps in southern California (San                                 species, was susceptible to GSOB larval 
            Diego Co.), but it was not linked to tree                                feeding in laboratory tests, but GSOB 
            injury or mortality until 2008.  In 2012,                                has not been observed to infest this oak 
                                                                                     species in the ifeld.  Goldspotted oak 
            GSOB was detected in Riverside Co. 
            and was likely introduced to this new  borer can also attack a taxonomically 
            county in infested ifrewood (Figure 2).                                  intermediate oak species, canyon live 
            The  movement  of  infested  ifrewood                                    oak,  Q. chrysolepis Liebm. (Section 
                                                                                     Protobalanus), and, on rare occasions, 
            was also most likely responsible 
                                                                                     a white oak species, Engelmann oak, 
            for additional satellite infestations 
                                                                                     Q. engelmannii Greene, in California.  
            of GSOB that have been detected 
                                                                                     Goldspotted oak borer has killed 
            elsewhere within San Diego Co., and 
                                                                                     canyon live oak at low levels (<25% 
            in Orange Co. Unregulated movement 
            of infested oak wood has presumably 
                                                                                     of surveyed trees) in San Diego Co.  
                                                                                 2
          Dead Engelmann oak trees have been 
                                                   then to northern California along 
          observed with signs of GSOB injury  the Coastal Mountain Range (Figure 
          (e.g., larval galleries and D-shaped 
                                                   3).  It also extends south into Baja 
          emergence holes, see below), but tree    California Norte, Mexico. California 
          mortality in these cases was likely a 
                                                   black oak occurs on Mt. Laguna and 
          result of a complex of factors (e.g., 
                                                   Palomar Mountain in San Diego Co., 
          drought and root disease).  Several 
                                                   the Transverse Mountain Range, 
          ornamental oak species, including 
                                                   Coastal Mountain Range, and along 
          holly oak, Q. ilex (Section Quercus),    the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range 
          and cork oak, Q. suber (Section 
                                                   to southern Oregon.  Goldspotted oak 
          Cerris), are planted frequently in the  borer-caused mortality has occurred 
          urban areas of southern California and 
                                                   in coast live oak at sea level as well as 
          may be at risk.  In laboratory studies, 
                                                   in California black oak at elevations 
          GSOB larvae fed on cork oak logs but 
                                                   up to approximately 6,000 feet in 
          were unable to complete development.     San Diego Co.; in laboratory tests, 
          However, it has been hypothesized that   prepupae (mature larvae in a hair-pin 
          species in the Sections Quercus and 
                                                   conifguration)  have  shown  a  cold-
          Cerris are not favored by GSOB and 
                                                   tolerance of approximately -0.4° F 
          likely not susceptible to the extensive 
                                                   during the winter months.  The beetle’s 
          injury needed to cause tree mortality.   distribution will likely expand from 
                                                   San Diego, Riverside, and Orange Cos.  
          In California, the range of coast live 
                                                   to mirror the range of its primary hosts 
          oak extends north from San Diego 
                                                   and conducive climatic conditions in 
          Co. along the Santa Anita Mountains  California and into Oregon and Mexico 
          and Transverse Mountain Range and 
                                                   (Figure 3).
          Figure 3.  Potential range of goldspotted oak borer in Arizona, California, New Mexico, Oregon, 
          and Baja California Norte, Mexico based on host distributions and climatic suitability. On the map, 
          areas with hosts are colored, and climatically suitable areas within the distribution of hosts appear 
          as shades of yellow (moderately suitable), orange, and red (highly suitable).  
                                                3
       Impacts                                     the main stem is girdled and the 
                                                   oaks  sustain  signiifcant  injury  and, 
                                                   eventually, mortality (Figure 4B).  This 
       Neither GSOB nor Mexican GSOB is 
       considered a signiifcant pest or threat     process appears to be gradual, taking 
                                                   from 3 to 5 years.  However, oaks 
       to forest health in its native range.  
                                                   predisposed by other injury agents 
       Instead, they have caused minor levels 
                                                   (e.g., drought and root disease) may 
       of injury to oaks (4% infestation 
       rates) and have been associated with succumb more quickly to the effects of 
                                                   GSOB larval feeding.
       background levels of tree mortality in 
       Arizona (2%) and Mexico (1%).  As 
                                                   In coast live oak woodlands in eastern 
       a consequence, virtually no research 
                                                   San Diego Co. where trees have 
       related to the biology and ecology of 
                                                   suffered at least a decade of infestation 
       these species occurred prior to 2008 
       when GSOB-caused oak mortality was          from GSOB, oak mortality levels have 
                                                   approached 45%.  Infestation rates have 
       discovered in California.                   been high (>90%) on large-diameter 
                                                   oaks at the hypothetical origin of the 
       The death of large-diameter coast 
                                                   beetle’s introduction near Descanso 
       live oaks and California black oaks in 
                                                   and Guatay in San Diego Co., but the 
       California results from several years of    rates are lower (<10%) at the edges of 
       extensive larval feeding at the interface   the advancing infestation.
       of the phloem and xylem (Figure 4).  
                                                   The expansion of the core area infested 
       This feeding kills large sections of 
                                                   by GSOB has progressed slowly in 
       live tissue (Figure 4A), including the 
       vascular cambium.  As a consequence,  San Diego Co. despite a maximum 
                                                   adult lfight distance of approximately 
          A                                        0.9 miles in tethered lfight mill assays 
                                                   in the laboratory.  Moderately and 
                                                   severely infested trees (known as 
                                                   brood trees) represent <7% of the 
                                                   oaks in forest stands in areas that have 
                                                    B
        Figure 4.  Typical goldspotted oak borer larval feeding galleries under recently removed bark of a 
        living coast live oak tree (A) and etched on the xylem (wood) surface of a dead coast live oak tree 
        (B).  The meandering dark-colored galleries in living phloem and xylem (A) are characteristic of 
        goldspotted oak borer larval feeding.
                                                4
                                                      longevity has not been recorded in the 
          been infested for longer than a decade.  
          Coast live oak brood trees were 
                                                      ifeld and is likely shorter in duration.  
          also found at low densities in newly 
                                                      Adults feed on oak foliage to survive, 
          infested sites and, based on inferred 
                                                      and females require approximately 10 
          population density from emergence 
                                                      days of feeding to become sexually 
          hole records, they contain 66 to 93%  mature and likely mate in the crown or 
          of the GSOB population at these 
          sites.  The contrast between the rate of    on the bark surface of the main stem 
          spread of the core population and the  or larger branches.  In the laboratory, 
                                                      a single female can lay approximately 
          appearance of satellite populations in 
          Orange, Riverside, and San Diego Cos.       200-500 eggs.  Females lay eggs in 
          suggests that GSOB will spread slowly       ifssures and crevices on the bark surface 
                                                      of the main stem and larger branches, 
          via natural dispersal or quickly via 
          human-assisted dispersal (Figure 2).        either singly or in clusters (Figure 5). 
                                                      The eggs are oval, approximately 0.01 
          Life History                                inches wide, tan-colored, and very 
                                                      dififcult  to  ifnd  on  the  bark  surface. 
                                                      Eggs develop in approximately 12 days 
          The goldspotted oak borer typically 
                                                      and ifrst instar larvae bore through the 
          completes one generation in a year.  
          However, anecdotal evidence suggests  bark into the phloem.  
          that populations may require more than 
          one year to complete development in 
          healthier hosts.  In southern California, 
          adults  lfy  from  mid-May  to  early 
          October with peak lfight occurring in 
          late-June to early July (Table 1A). The 
          majority  of  adult  lfight  occurs  from 
          June to September.  Adults can live for     Figure 5.  Goldspotted oak borer eggs laid on 
          several months in the laboratory, but       the bark surface of coast live oak.
          Table 1.  Approximate timing of the goldspotted oak borer life cycle in southern California (A) and 
          optimal timing of trapping period (B); application of contact (C) and systemic insecticides (D); and 
          timing of mechanical grinding (E) and tarping (F) of infested oak wood.
                                                   5
                                                      Immediately prior to pupation, larvae 
        Goldspotted oak borer larvae likely 
                                                      begin to constrict to adult length in 
        complete four instars.  Larvae are 
                                                      the pupal cell (Figure 6D).  Pupae 
        white, legless, and approximately 0.8 
                                                      and teneral (newly formed) adults 
        inches long by 0.1 inches wide when 
                                                      are present from April to August in 
        fully mature.  First instar larvae are 
        <0.05 inches long and dififcult to locate     the pupal cells.  Pupae are the same 
                                                      size as adults, but initially are white 
        in the phloem (Figure 6A).  Larvae 
                                                      and soft-bodied (Figure 6E).  Pupae 
        have C-shaped spiracles (holes where 
                                                      transform into teneral adults when 
        air exchange occurs) and a pair of 
                                                      their exoskeleton begins to sclerotize, 
        spines at the tip of the abdomen, both 
        of which can be used to identify all          or harden, and darken in color.
        Agrilus larvae (Figure 6B).  In southern 
        California, larvae can be found feeding       Adults are black to dark green with 
                                                      three dorsal pairs of gold-colored 
        from July to mid-December in the 
                                                      pubescent spots on the elytra and one 
        phloem and primarily on the outer 
                                                      faint pair located dorsolaterally on the 
        xylem surface (Table 1A).  Mature 
        larvae migrate to the outer phloem just  thorax (Figures 1 and 6F).  Additional 
                                                      gold-colored pubescence is located 
        beneath the bark where they create a 
                                                      laterally on the thorax and abdomen 
        pupal cell and form a prepupa (Figure 
                                                      (Figure 1).  Males can be differentiated 
        6C,D).  Prepupae have been found in 
        the outer phloem nearly year round,           from females by a ventral groove on the 
        but at higher densities during the cooler     ifrst male abdominal segment.  Adults 
        months (November to May) (Table 1A).          chew a D-shaped emergence hole 
                                                      through the outer bark and are seldom 
        Ground surveys and sampling of trees 
                                                      observed in the forest.  Adults cause 
        for live GSOB should be conducted at 
        this time of year because mature larvae       minor and barely noticeable feeding 
        (prepupae) can be observed easily in          damage to oak foliage, which does not 
        the outer phloem (Figure 7).                  substantially impact tree health.
                A      B             C             D       E                 F
        Figure 6. A goldspotted oak borer ifrst instar larva (A), fourth instar larva (B), mature larva/
        prepupa (C), constricted larva/prepupa (D), pupa (E), and adults (F).  The second arrow depicts 
        the location of the ventral longitudinal groove on the abdomen of males. 
                                                   6
                                                          A                           B
                                                          B
           Figure 7.  Goldspotted oak borer mature 
           larva or prepupa can be found in the phloem 
           adjacent to the bark surface of coast live oak. 
           Evidence of Infestation
           Crown thinning and dieback are 
           common indicators of declining oak 
           health and typical of trees that are 
           moderately and severely infested  Figure 8.  Goldspotted oak borer D-shaped 
                                                         emergence holes on the bark surface of coast 
           by GSOB.  Newly infested trees 
                                                         live oak (A).  High densities of emergence 
           may have healthy, full crowns, but 
           thinning and dieback become evident           holes (marked in red paint, B) are observed 
                                                         frequently on coast live oak killed by 
           following successive years of larval 
                                                         goldspotted oak borer in California. 
           feeding.  Crown color of coast live 
                                                         Unlike some other wood-boring  
           oak trees infested by GSOB or by the 
                                                         Agrilus species, GSOB does not 
           impact of various stress factors range 
                                                         attack the upper branches in the crown 
           from dark green (healthy) to grayish 
                                                         during the early stages of infestation.  
           green (severely injured).  Thinning 
                                                         The GSOB adult emergence holes 
           crowns can be used to identify 
                                                         (approximately 0.15 inches in 
           potentially infested trees for scrutiny 
                                                         diameter) can appear before any 
           for additional symptoms (see below).  
                                                         other injury symptoms are observed, 
           However, crown thinning does not 
                                                         but can be easily overlooked when 
           always indicate GSOB infestation 
                                                         they occur at low densities.  A high 
           (e.g., distinct twig or branch mortality 
           (lfagging)  in  the  crown  can  indicate     density of emergence holes (10’s to 
           injury by twig girdlers, bark beetles, or     1,000’s/8 feet of lower stem) on coast 
           scale insects).                               live oak and California black oak is 
                                                         not uncommon when trees have been 
                                                         infested for several years (Figure 8B).  
           Goldspotted oak borer is the only 
           subcortical insect that constructs  As the population density increases, 
           D-shaped emergence holes on the main          emergence holes can be observed 
           stem and larger branches (>8 inches in   easily on the lower part of the main 
           diameter) of oaks in California, making       stem (<8 feet) of infested oaks.  
           the presence of these holes a diagnostic      Thus, performing a total count of the 
                                                         emergence holes in this area of the 
           sign of infestation by this exotic pest 
           (Figure 8A).                                  stem can provide an estimate of the 
                                                         extent of GSOB injury.
                                                      7
          Removing the outer bark and phloem 
          exposes larvae and the signs of their 
          feeding at the interface of the phloem 
          and xylem.  Larval galleries have 
          a meandering pattern; are dark in 
          color when the fresh bark is recently 
          removed; are about 0.16 inches wide 
          when larvae are mature; and are tightly 
          packed with black boring dust (frass).  
          Following infestation by GSOB, 
          secondary wood borers, including other                   Figure 9.  Dark-colored wet staining or red 
          lfatheaded borers, Chrysobothris mali  bleeding on the bark is sometimes associated 
          Horn and Chrysobothris wintu Wellso  with larval feeding by goldspotted oak borers.  
          and Manley (Coleoptera: Buprestidae),                    Bark staining does not always indicate 
                                                                   goldspotted oak borer injury and may only 
          oak cordwood borers, Xylotrechus 
                                                                   appear after extensive injury has occurred. 
          nauticus Mannerheim (Coleoptera: 
                                                                   Acorn woodpeckers, Melanerpes 
          Cerambycidae), oak ambrosia 
                                                                   formicivorus Swainson (Piciformes: 
          beetles, Monarthrum spp. Kirsch and 
                                                                   Picidae), forage for larvae, prepupae, 
          Gnathotrichus pilosus LeConte (both 
          Coleoptera: Scolytidae), and western                     and pupae just beneath the bark surface 
          oak bark beetles, Pseudopityophthorus                    in the outer phloem.  Woodpecker 
          spp. Swaine (Coleoptera: Scolytidae),  foraging occurs frequently from fall to 
          frequently attack these stressed oaks in                 early summer when larval densities are 
                                                                   highest in these areas of the tree stem.  
          southern California.  Injury symptoms 
          associated with these secondary insects                  Woodpeckers chip away the outer oak 
          can be mistaken for GSOB injury; see                     bark exposing the red phloem (in coast 
                                                                   live oak) and the dark-colored larval 
          Flint et al. (2013) for a description of 
          their emergence holes.                                   galleries and pupal cells (Figure 10).  
                                                                   The phloem exposed by woodpecker 
          Dark-colored sap stains on the bark foraging turns black with age and thus 
          surface can indicate a GSOB-infested 
                                                                   becomes less evident over time.  The 
          tree (Figure 9).  Sometimes sap exudate                  degree of woodpecker foraging can 
          over GSOB-infested areas can manifest                    vary greatly by site, but can be very 
          as a blood-red secretion that hardens 
                                                                   extensive on heavily infested trees.
          as it dries.  Bark staining associated 
          with GSOB injury is frequently 
          observed along the main stem and 
          larger branches, and is not associated 
          with invaginations along the stem, at 
          branch junctions, or mechanically and 
          structurally wounded areas.  Several 
          secondary fungi can be associated with 
          these dark-stained bark areas, but they 
          are not always present on infested trees                 Figure 10  Woodpecker foraging for 
                                                                   goldspotted oak borer prepupae on the main 
          and may only occur after GSOB has 
          already severely injured the tree.                       stem can expose larval galleries, pupal cells, 
                                                                   and red phloem of coast live oak.
                                                               8
           Management                                     crowns of oaks on the southern aspect 
                                                          of a tree and hung at 9-10 feet.  At 
           Monitoring                                     sites with low population densities of 
                                                          GSOB (<20% infestation), the traps 
           Ground surveys are the most 
                                                          may be ineffective at detecting beetle 
           effective method for detecting GSOB 
           infestations and determining the level         populations.
           of injury caused by GSOB.  However, 
                                                          Clear panel sticky traps placed at breast 
           ground surveys are time consuming 
                                                          height on the main stem of declining 
           and GSOB-caused injury symptoms 
                                                          oaks can also be used to capture GSOB 
           are often not obvious during the early 
                                                          adults.  Felling live host oaks and 
           stages of infestation.  In its native 
                                                          leaving a high stump (approximately 4 
           range, rates of GSOB infestation and 
                                                          feet tall) can serve as a trap “tree” for 
           tree mortality are low (4% and 2%, 
                                                          GSOB.  Girdling live oak trees has not 
           respectively, in a forest stand).  These 
                                                          been very effective at attracting GSOB 
           rates have been much higher (90% 
                                                          even at sites with high beetle population 
           and 45%, respectively) in the invaded 
                                                          densities (>50% infestation).  These 
           range.  Large-diameter red oaks are 
                                                          methods can be useful for detecting 
           the preferred host and should be the 
                                                          GSOB, but are not efifcacious tools for 
           focus of ground surveys.  Furthermore,         preventing or suppressing infestations.  
           oaks along the forest stand edge should        Goldspotted oak borer adults have 
           be  checked  ifrst  because  there  is  an     responded to host bark and foliage 
                                                          volatiles in electroantennographic 
           initial preference for GSOB to attack 
           trees along the edges of a stand (<150         detection analyses in the laboratory; 
           feet from the forest stand edge).  To          however, a lure to improve GSOB 
           facilitate detection of GSOB, the outer  adult trap catches has not yet been 
           bark of heavily infested trees should be       developed.  Like most Agrilus spp. 
                                                          studied so far, GSOB does not respond 
           chipped away to expose prepupae and 
                                                          to ethanol-baited traps.  However, 
           pupae in the outer phloem or the black 
                                                          additional research will be necessary 
           meandering larval galleries on the 
                                                          to determine whether ethanol may be 
           xylem surface.  Tree injury symptoms 
           caused by GSOB, including the degree           a semiochemical utilized by GSOB 
           of crown thinning; density of D-shaped         in the context of other host- or beetle-
           emergence holes and bark staining; and         produced signals.
           the presence/absence of woodpecker 
                                                          Although the traps described here have 
           foraging, have been integrated into a 
                                                          been useful for researchers or managers 
           system to rank tree health and guide 
           management decisions (Figure 11).              to detect movement of GSOB into new 
                                                          areas, they are not sensitive enough 
                                                          to guide management decisions.  
           Stickem-coated purple prism panel 
           lfight-intercept  traps  are  the  most        Land managers should focus their 
                                                          monitoring efforts on surveying for 
           effective traps for detecting GSOB 
           (Figure 12).  Traps should be monitored        GSOB emergence holes on oak trees 
                                                          and ground-checking declining and 
           from May to September when most 
           adult lfight occurs (Table 1B).  Traps         recently killed oaks as indicated from 
           should be positioned adjacent to the           aerial survey data.
                                                       9
                                              1- CROWN RATING (1-5)
           1                                                        2
           3                                                       4
          1: Full, healthy crown (0% leaf loss); 2: Minor twig dieback and/or light thinning (10-25% leaf loss);                     
          3: Moderate twig dieback and thinning (25-50% leaf loss); 4:Severe dieback to larger branches (>50% leaf 
          loss); 5: Tree is dead, no living foliage.
           2- EMERGENCE HOLE RATING  (1-3)                           3- BARK STAINING  RATING (1-4)
         1: Less  than ten D-shaped emergence holes on the        1: One to ifve areas of staining on the lower 
         lower main stem (<8 feet).  2: Ten to 25 emergence       main stem (<8 feet).  2: Six to ten stained areas.  
         holes. 3: Greater than 25 emergence holes.               3: Greater than 10 areas stained areas. 4: Bark 
                                                                  cracking evident.
             4- WOODPECKER FORAGING (+/-)
          Present or absent on the main stem or larger branches
          Figure 11.  A health rating system developed to determine the degree of goldspotted oak borer 
          injury and assist with management decisions (modiifed from Hishinuma et al. 2011).  The health 
          rating system includes the degree of crown thinning and dieback; the density of D-shaped 
          emergence holes and areas of bark staining; and presence/absence of woodpecker foraging.
                                                              10
                                                                  (<8 feet) will likely die in the next 
                                                                  few years.  Preventive contact sprays 
                                                                  of a carbamate (Sevin) or a pyrethroid 
                                                                  (bifenthrin and permethrin) insecticide 
                                                                  have killed GSOB adults in laboratory 
                                                                  assays of treated foliage one month and 
                                                                  one year post-application.
                                                                  Systemic insecticides applied as a 
                                                                  trunk injection or a basal spray may 
                                                                  kill larvae feeding in the phloem 
            Figure 12.  A purple prism panel lfight-              and outer xylem, but they may also 
            intercept trap hung at 9-10 feet on a metal           target adults when they feed on the 
            conduit pole adjacent to the crown of a coast         foliage.  These materials should also 
            live oak for monitoring the lfight of goldspotted 
            oak borer adults.                                     be  applied  by  a  certiifed  pesticide 
            Insecticide Treatments                                applicator.  Systemic insecticides such 
                                                                  as neonicotinoids (e.g., imidacloprid) 
            A contact insecticide applied to the 
                                                                  or emamectin benzoate were effective 
            main stem and to the larger branches 
                                                                  at killing adults in laboratory leaf-
            (>8 inches in diameter) is the best 
            option for preventing GSOB injury to                  feeding bioassays when leaves were 
            high-value oaks.  To reduce the amount                collected from coast live oaks and 
                                                                  smaller diameter California black oaks 
            of spray drift and the impact to non-
            target arthropods, treating the entire                that had been injected in December 
            crown is not suggested and likely not  and/or February and assayed 3 or 5 
                                                                  months  later.    In  the  ifeld,  systemic 
            feasible for ground applications to 
            large oaks.  Contact spray applications               treatments with imidacloprid or 
                                                                  emamectin benzoate slowed the rate of 
            should occur in May prior to the adult 
            lfight period in southern California and              growth of GSOB populations on large 
            be  re-applied  annually  by  a  certiifed            diameter coast live oaks.  However, 
            pesticide applicator (Table 1C).  These               studies to evaluate protection of trees 
                                                                  from GSOB with systemic insecticides 
            preventive insecticides should only 
                                                                  are still in progress.  Insecticide 
            be applied after evidence of GSOB 
                                                                  uptake was greater in smaller diameter 
            has been found in the immediate area 
                                                                  California black oaks than coast live 
            (<½ mile).  Contact sprays or systemic 
                                                                  oaks with stem-injected applications.  
            insecticides (see below) should not 
                                                                  Systemic treatments applied as trunk 
            be applied to GSOB-infested oaks 
                                                                  injections to oaks should be applied 
            with a crown injury rating of “3” or 
                                                                  from November to February when 
            greater and an emergence hole rating 
                                                                  treatment can be followed by seasonal 
            of “3” (>25 emergence holes, see 
                                                                  precipitation, which facilitates 
            Figure 11) because they have already 
                                                                  translocation of the active ingredient in 
            experienced high levels of injury.  In 
                                                                  the vascular system (Table 1D).
            these instances, insecticide treatments 
            may have limited beneift in preventing                Basal spray applications of a systemic 
            tree mortality.  Trees with >120 GSOB                 insecticide (dinotefuran) to uninfested 
            emergence holes on the lower stem 
                                                                  coast live oak and California black 
                                                              11
        oak trunks resulted in high levels of         population density and dispersal, 
        active ingredient in foliage samples 
                                                      grinding wood should occur before the 
        when applied in May just prior to 
                                                      emergence of adults in May, but the 
        adult  lfight.    The  active  ingredient     treatment can be applied year round 
        had declined dramatically when 
                                                      to kill any of the life stages (Table 
        foliage was collected in September.  
                                                      1E).  Grinding wood is only practical 
        Basal trunk applications to coast live 
                                                      for large-scale management projects, 
        and California black oaks yielded 
                                                      due to the specialized equipment 
        the greatest translocation of active 
                                                      required and the cost of the equipment.  
        ingredient in smaller diameter (<12 
                                                      Chipping infested wood is not 
        inches dbh) trees, but translocation 
                                                      recommended as a management option 
        was also detected in foliage at high 
                                                      because of the dififculty with treating 
        levels one-month post application in 
                                                      large, dense pieces of oak stems with 
        large diameter (>40 inches dbh) trees.  
        Although GSOB adults were not killed          a standard chipper.  Goldspotted oak 
        in laboratory leaf-feeding bioassays,         borer does not attack the smaller 
                                                      stems and branches, which are often 
        the highest label rate was not used in 
        these studies.  Based on best current         targeted in chipping operations. A 
        knowledge, we recommend that basal more economical and feasible option 
                                                      for landowners with small quantities of 
        trunk applications of dinotefuran 
        be applied annually, whereas trunk-           wood is to either enclose or debark the 
                                                      infested wood (Figure 13B,C).  
        injected applications of imidacloprid 
        and emamectin benzoate be applied             A
        once every two years in southern 
        California.  Repeated stem injections 
        can cause injury to the trunk, and treated 
        trees should be monitored for bark 
        cracking, staining, and crown thinning.  
        Watering high-value oaks can facilitate 
        insecticide uptake and alleviate 
        drought stress during dry years.  For 
                                                      B                C
        high-value sites or individual trees, a 
        combination of topical and systemic 
        insecticide treatments may provide the 
        most effective protection.  However, 
        this combined insecticidal approach 
        has not been evaluated sufifciently to 
        support this management action.
        Mechanical Treatments
        Grinding GSOB-infested wood to 
                                                      Figure 13.  To manage wood infested with 
                                                      goldspotted oak borer, large quantities of wood 
        a particle size of <3 inches with a 
        3-inch-“minus” grinding screen is the         can be ground with a tub grinder (A); small 
        most effective mechanical method for          quantities of wood can be enclosed with plastic 
        eliminating GSOB populations (Figure          sheeting (B); or small quantities of wood can 
                                                      be debarked by landowners (C).  If used for 
                                                      ifrewood, the wood should be burned locally.
        13A).  For greatest impact on GSOB 
                                                  12
          Stacks  of  infested  ifrewood  can  be     GSOB-associated tree mortality.  In 
          enclosed with thick (6 mil), clear, UV  mountain         communities,      ifrewood 
          resistant plastic sheeting and placed in  is often a valuable commodity and 
          a sunny location from the ifrst of May      sometimes the primary source of 
          to September (Table 1F).  If the edges 
                                                      heating.  To minimize movement or 
          of the tarp are buried in the soil and 
                                                      introduction of GSOB, the following 
          the integrity of the tarp is maintained 
                                                      simple and effective approaches 
          from May to September, emerging 
                                                      for reducing GSOB-associated tree 
          adults are not capable of escaping and 
                                                      mortality are available: 1) educate 
          will eventually die.  Metal screening, 
                                                      community members to screen 
          tightly rolled and secured at the seams,    incoming  ifrewood  for  evidence  of 
          can also be used to enclose wood.   
                                                      GSOB; 2) allow wood from recently 
          Debarking wood requires the manual 
                                                      felled trees to season within the 
          separation of the bark and phloem 
                                                      infested zone for longer than two years; 
          from the wood prior to the emergence 
                                                      and 3) keep infested material away 
          of GSOB adults.  A log splitter, or other   from uninfested trees.  Limiting the 
          debarking tools, can remove outer bark      movement of ifrewood <50 miles from 
          in large pieces.  This option can be very   the location of harvest, (e.g., “Buy   it 
          labor intensive and is only feasible for 
                                                      where you burn it” approach) is a best 
          small quantities of wood.  Goldspotted      management practice for limiting the 
          oak borers can survive in the bark and 
                                                      spread of GSOB and other subcortical 
          phloem shavings, so this material must      invasive insects.
          be destroyed (e.g., ground or burned) 
          or tarped to eliminate all live beetles.    Natural Enemies
                                                      Three parasitoid wasp species and 
          Cultural Treatments                         several generalist insect predators 
                                                      have been associated with GSOB in 
          Removing moderately- and severely-
                                                      Arizona and California.  The impact 
          infested trees (i.e., “brood” trees) may 
          slow GSOB population growth at high-        of these parasitoids and predators on 
          value sites.  These infested trees should   GSOB populations is unknown in 
                                                      both regions, but low levels of GSOB 
          be felled and the wood managed 
                                                      mortality (<15%) have been attributed 
          by using one of the aforementioned 
                                                      to some of these species.  Low densities 
          mechanical treatments.  Felling 
                                                      of natural enemies and low levels of 
          infested trees and the application 
                                                      host resistance may have contributed 
          of a preventive insecticide to any 
                                                      to the elevated levels of oak mortality 
          remaining uninfested or lightly 
                                                      by this indigenous exotic species in 
          infested (<10 emergence holes) large-
                                                      California.  Calosota elongata Gibson 
          diameter oaks may provide the best 
          opportunity for maintaining high-value      (Hymenoptera: Eupelmidae), a newly 
          sites.  However, no experimental data       described ectoparasitoid wasp, is 
          are available presently to support these    only known from GSOB prepupae 
          combined management steps.                  in Arizona and California (Figure 
                                                      14A,B).  Calosota elongata was likely 
          Limiting the movement of GSOB-
                                                      introduced into California with the 
          infested wood into and within a 
                                                      original GSOB population, but its 
          community may be the most effective 
                                                      known adventive distribution is limited 
          management method for reducing 
                                                      to southeastern San Diego Co. in 
                                                   13
         California.  A Trichogramma sp. wasp               distribution and parasitizes species in 
         (Hymenoptera: Trichogrammatidae)  several insect orders, including beetles 
                                                            (Coleoptera), moths (Lepidoptera), 
         was associated with GSOB eggs in 
                                                            and  ants  (Hymenoptera).    Snakelfies 
         Arizona, but was only found at low 
                                                            (Raphidioptera) and bark-gnawing 
         densities there and is believed to be 
                                                            beetles (Trogossitidae) have also 
         a generalist parasitoid (Figure 14C).  
                                                            been found feeding on GSOB larvae 
         Atanycolus simplex (Hymenoptera: 
                                                            or in larval galleries.  Though it has 
         Braconidae) is a generalist larval 
         parasitoid found in association with               appeared to be locally extensive on 
                                                            highly infested trees, the impact of 
         GSOB, but it also parasitizes other 
         wood-boring insects throughout the                 woodpecker feeding on GSOB has not 
                                                            been quantiifed.  In general, the impact 
         USA (Figure 14D).  The straw itch 
                                                            of insect and avian predators on GSOB 
         mite,  Pyemotes tritici Lagrèze-Fossat 
         and Montané (Acari: Pyemotidae), has               population density is likely to be limited 
                                                            in California.  Calosota elongata was 
         been found on prepupae, pupae, and 
         unemerged GSOB adults from Arizona                 considered a promising candidate for 
         and California and on Mexican GSOB                 augmentative biological control in 
                                                            California.  However, the dififculty of 
         in southern Mexico (Figure 14E).  
                                                            rearing GSOB populations on cut logs 
         Pyemotes tritici has a cosmopolitan 
                                                            and at high densities in a laboratory 
           A                      B                         setting makes an augmentative 
                                                            biological control program infeasible 
                                                            at this time. 
                                                            Assistance
                                                            If you suspect that you have found signs 
           C                      D                         of GSOB or symptoms of its damage on 
                                                            your property, or on municipal, state, 
                                                            or federal lands please contact a Pest 
                                                            Control Advisor, your local University 
                                                            Cooperative  Extension  Ofifce,  the 
                                                            County Agricultural Commissioner’s 
           E                                                Ofifce,  or  your  local  USDA  Forest 
                                                            Service, Forest Health Protection 
                                                            representative (http://www.fs.fed.us/
                                                            foresthealth/).  This publication and 
                                                            other Forest Insect and Disease Lealfets 
                                                            are available online (www.fs.usda.gov/
                                                            goto/fhp/ifdls).
         Figure 14.  Natural enemies associated with        Acknowledgements
         goldspotted oak borer, include Calosota            The authors thank D. Betancourt, A. 
         elongata (A: parasitoid larvae feeding on a        Cipollone, A.D. Graves, Z. Heath, K. 
         GSOB prepupa and B: adult parasitoids);            Koeslag, J. Lydick, J. Moore, and G. 
         Trichogramma sp. adult wasp on a GSOB              Walter (USDA Forest Service, Forest 
         egg (C); Atanycolus simplex adult wasp (D);        Health Protection); B. Strom (USDA 
         and the straw itch mite, Pyemotes tritici on a 
         GSOB prepua (E).                                   Forest Service, Southern Research 
                                                        14
                                                                 Coleman, T.W., and S.J. Seybold. 2011. 
            Station); Y. Chen, L. Haavik, S.M. 
                                                                 Collection history and comparison of the 
            Hishinuma, and A. Poloni (Dept. of 
                                                                 interactions of the goldspotted oak borer, 
            Entomology, University of California, 
                                                                 Agrilus auroguttatus Schaeffer (Coleoptera: 
            Davis); M. Hoddle, V. Lopez, and R. 
            Stouthamer (Dept. of Entomology,  and                Buprestidae), with host oaks in southern 
                                                                 California and southeastern Arizona, U.S.A. 
                                                                 Coleop. Bull. 65: 93–108.
            Nematology, University of California, 
            Riverside); L. Singleton (Dept. of 
                                                                 Coleman, T.W., V. Lopez, P. Rugman-Jones, 
            Biological Sciences, California  State 
            University, Long Beach), and D. Crook                R. Stouthamer, S.J. Seybold, R. Reardon, and 
                                                                 M.S. Hoddle. 2012. Can the destruction of 
            (Dept. of Entomology, University 
                                                                 California’s oak woodlands be prevented?  
            of Massachusetts) for contributing  Potential for biological control of the 
                                                                 goldspotted oak borer, Agrilus auroguttatus.  
            information and resources to the 
            information  presented  in  this  lealfet.           BioControl 57: 211–225.
            We appreciate critical reviews of this 
            lealfet by Y. Chen, R.A. Haack (USDA                 Coleman, T.W., A.D. Graves, M. Hoddle, Z. 
                                                                 Heath, Y. Chen, M.L. Flint, and S.J. Seybold. 
                                                                 2012. Forest stand composition and impacts 
            Forest Service, Northern Research 
                                                                 associated with Agrilus auroguttatus Schaeffer 
            Station), S.M. Hishinuma, and A.S. 
            Munson (USDA Forest Service, Forest                  (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) and Agrilus coxalis 
            Health Protection).                                  Waterhouse in oak woodlands. For. Ecol. 
                                                                 Manage. 276: 104–117.
            Photo Credits                                        Coleman, T.W., Y. Chen, A.D. Graves, S.M. 
                                                                 Hishinuma, N.E. Grulke, M.L. Flint, and 
            Figure 2: J. Moore (USDA Forest Service, 
            Forest Health Protection); Figure 3: R. Venette      S.J. Seybold.  2014.  Developing monitoring 
                                                                 techniques for the invasive goldspotted oak 
            (USDA Forest Service, Northern Research 
                                                                 borer (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) in California.  
            Station); Figure 14C: R. Lara (University of 
            California, Riverside); All other ifgures by T.W.    Environ. Entomol. 43: 729–743.
            Coleman (USDA Forest Service, Forest Health 
            Protection).                                         Coleman, T.W., M.I. Jones, M.S. Hoddle, L.J. 
                                                                 Haavik, J.C. Moser, M.L. Flint, and S.J. Seybold.  
            References                                           2015.  Pyemotes tritici (Acari: Pyemotidae):  A 
                                                                 parasitoid of Agrilus auroguttatus and Agrilus 
            Chen, Y., M.L Flint, T.W. Coleman, J.J. 
            Doccola, D.M. Grosman, D.L. Wood, and S.J.  coxalis (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) in the 
                                                                 southwestern United States of America and 
            Seybold. 2015.  Impact of the goldspotted oak 
                                                                 southern Mexico.  Can. Entomol. 147: 244-248.
            borer,  Agrilus auroguttatus, on the health of 
            coast live oak before and after treatment with 
                                                                 Coleman, T.W., S.L. Smith, M.I. Jones, 
            two systemic insecticides.  Pest Manage. Sci.  
                                                                 A.D.  Graves,  and  B.  Strom.  2017.  Efifcacy 
            Early view:  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
                                                                 of systemic insecticides for control of the 
            doi/10.1002/ps.3959/pdf                              invasive goldspotted oak borer (Coleoptera: 
                                                                 Buprestidae) in California. J. Econ. Entomol. 
            Coleman, T.W., and S.J. Seybold. 2008. 
                                                                 https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/tox199.
            Previously unrecorded damage to oak, Quercus 
            spp., in southern California by the goldspotted      Flint, M.L., M.I. Jones, T.W. Coleman, and 
            oak borer, Agrilus coxalis Waterhouse 
                                                                 S.J. Seybold.  2013.  Goldspotted oak borer.  
            (Coleoptera: Buprestidae).  Pan-Pac. Entomol. 
                                                                 University of California Statewide Integrated 
            84: 288–300.                                         Pest Management Program, Oakland, California, 
                                                                 Agriculture and Natural Resources Pest Notes, 
            Coleman, T.W., and S.J. Seybold.  2010.  
                                                                 Pub. 74163, January 2013, 7 pp. http://www     .
            Veriifcation of a useful character for separating    ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/pn74163.
            the sexes of the goldspotted oak borer, Agrilus  html
            coxalis auroguttatus (Coleoptera: Buprestidae).  
            Pan-Pac. Entomol. 86: 58–62.
                                                             15
            Haavik, L.J., T.W. Coleman, Y. Chen, M.I. Jones,                        Jones, M.I., T.W. Coleman, A.D. Graves, 
            R.C. Venette, M.L. Flint, and S.J. Seybold. 2012.                       M.L. Flint, and S.J. Seybold. 2013.  Sanitation 
            First occurrence of the goldspotted oak borer 
                                                                                    options for managing oak wood infested with 
            parasitoid,  Calosota elongata (Hymenoptera: 
                                                                                    the invasive goldspotted oak borer (Coleoptera: 
            Eupelmidae), in California. Pan-Pac. Entomol.                           Buprestidae) in southern California. J. Econ. 
            88: 274–276.                                                            Entomol. 106: 235–246.
            Haavik, L.J., A.D. Graves, T.W. Coleman, 
                                                                                    Lopez, V.M., P.F. Rugman-Jones, T.W. 
            M.L. Flint, R.C. Venette, and S.J. Seybold. 
                                                                                    Coleman, M.S. Hoddle, and R. Stouthamer.  
            2014.  Suitability of native and ornamental oak 
                                                                                    2014. Population genetics of goldspotted 
            species in California for Agrilus  auroguttatus.  
            Entomol. Exp. Appl. 150: 86–97.                                         oak borer, Agrilus auroguttatus Schaeffer 
                                                                                    (Coleoptera: Buprestidae): Investigating the 
                                                                                    origin of an invasive pest of native oaks in 
            Haavik, L.J., M.L. Flint, T.W. Coleman, R.C. 
                                                                                    California. Biol. Invasions 16: 2393–2402.
            Venette, and S.J. Seybold.  2015.  Goldspotted 
            oak borer effects on tree health and colonization                       Lopez, V.M., and M.S. Hoddle. 2013. Mortality 
            patterns at six newly-established sites.  Agric. 
            For. Entomol.  Early view:  http://onlinelibrary.                       factors affecting Agrilus auroguttatus Schaeffer 
            wiley.com/doi/10.1111/afe.12090/epdf                                    (Coleoptera: Buprestidae) eggs in the native 
                                                                                    and invaded ranges.  Biol. Control 67: 143-148. 
            Hishinuma, S., T.W. Coleman, M.L. Flint, 
                                                                                    Singleton, L. 2014. Host tree and site 
            and S.J. Seybold. 2011. Goldspotted oak 
            borer:  Field identiifcation guide. University of                       characteristics           inlfuencing            goldspotted 
                                                                                    oak borer, Agrilus auroguttaus Schaefffer 
            California Agriculture and Natural Resources, 
                                                                                    (Coleoptera: Buprestidae), populations in 
            Statewide Integrated Pest Management 
                                                                                    southern California. Master of Science Thesis. 
            Program, 6 pp., Oakland, California, January 
            13, 2011.  http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PDF/ Department of Biological Sciences, California 
            MISC/GSOB_ifeld-identiifcation-guide.pdf                                State University, Long Beach. 74 pp. 
                          Pesticides used improperly can be injurious to humans, animals, and plants.  Follow the directions and heed all precautions on the 
                          labels. Some States have restrictions on the use of certain pesticides.  Check your state and local regulations.  Also, because pesticides 
                          are under constant review by the Federal Envioronmental Protection Agency, consult your county agricultural agent or State extension 
                          specialist to be sure the intended use is still registered.
              Non-Discrimination Policy
              The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for employment 
              on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religión, reprisal, and where applicable, political beliefs, 
              marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance 
              program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or funded by the Department. (Not all 
              prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)
              To File an Employment Complaint
              If you wish to ifle an employment complaint, you must contact your agency’s EEO Counselor (click the hyperlink for list of EEO counsel-
              ors) within 45 days of the date of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be 
              found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_ifling_ifle.html.
              To File a Program Complaint
              If you wish to ifle a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, 
              found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_ifling_cust.html, or at any USDA ofifce, or call (866) 632-9992 to request the form. 
              Send your completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Ofifce of Adjudication, 1400 
              Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.
              Persons with Disabilities
              Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to ifle either an EEO or program complaint please 
              contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish). Persons with disabilities who wish to 
              ifle a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly or by email. If you require alternative means 
              of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) please contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-
              2600 (voice and TDD).
            Published by USDA Forest Service, Paciifc Northwest Region (R6), Portland, Oregon
            FS/R6/RO/FIDL#183-15/001 (Rev. 08/2017
                                                                              16
