                                             Productivity and Structural Reform: 
                          Why Countries Succeed & Fail, and What Should Be 
                                             Done So Failing Countries Succeed
                                                                           by Ray Dalio 
                    In this report the drivers of productivity are shown and are used to create an economic health index. That index 
                    shows how 20 major countries are doing as measured by 19 economic health gauges made up of 81 indicators, 
                    and it shows what these gauges portend for real GDP growth in each of these countries over the next 10 years. 
                    As you will see, past predictions based on this process have been highly reliable. For this reason this economic 
                    health index provides both a reliable prognosis for each of these country’s growth rates over the next 10 years 
                    and a reliable formula for success. By looking at these cause-effect relationships in much the same way as a 
                    doctor looks at one’s genetics, blood tests and regimes for exercise and diet, we can both see each country’s 
                    health prospects and know what changes each can make so that these countries can become economically 
                    healthier. 
                    We are making this research availabl it will facilitate the very important dise in the hope that                                                                                  cussions about 
                    structural reforms that are now going on and will help both the public and policy makers to look past their 
                    ideological differences to see the economy as a machine in much the same way as doctors see bodies as a 
                    machine and look at the relationships of cholesterol and heart attacks  analytically rather than ideologically. 
                                                                           The Template 
                    This study is presented in three parts: 
                         •    In Part 1, “The Formula For Economic Success,” we show how indicators of countries’ productivity and
                              indebtedness would have predicted their subsequent 10-year growth rates going back 70 years, and
                              how these economic health indicators can be used to both predict and shape the long-term economic
                              health of countries.  By knowing the linkages between a) indicators of productivity such as the costs of
                              educated people, the amount of bureaucracy in the government, the amount of corruption in the system,
                              how much people value working relative to enjoying life, etc., and b) the subsequent 10-year economic
                              outcomes, policy makers can decide how to change these determinants to affect long-term outcomes.
                         •    In Part 2, “Economic Health Indices by Country, and the Prognoses That They Imply,” we show each of
                              the 20 countries’ economic health indices by coonent and aggregated, and how mp                                        these lead to the
                              projected growth over the next 10 years.  In this section you can see a synthesis for each country based
                              on an objective review of each of the indicators and their relative importance.  Because our
                              understanding has been completely systematizede, ther is no qualitative judgment used in describing
                              these estimates.  In fact, the texts have been computer generated.
                         •    In Part 3, “The Rises and Declines of Economies Over the Last 500 Years,” we look at how different
                              countries’ shares of the world economy have changed over the last 500 years and why these changes
                              have occurred.
                    © 2017 Ray Dalio                                                24
