                                   Information about your condition from 
                                   The British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS)  
                 
                You have been given this leaflet because you have been diagnosed with 
                urinary stones.  The aim of the leaflet is to provide you with advice on how 
                to modify your diet and fluid intake to reduce your risk of getting further 
                stones.   
                We have consulted specialist surgeons during its preparation, so it 
                represents best practice in UK urology.  You should use it in addition to any 
                advice already given to you.  
                To view the online version of this leaflet, type the text below into your web 
                browser: 
                http://www.baus.org.uk/_userfiles/pages/files/Patients/Leaflets/Stone diet.pdf 
                                                        Key Points 
                   •  Specific types of stone can be managed by measures aimed at the 
                       cause of your stone formation 
                   •  Generally, keeping your urine dilute & colourless reduces your risk 
                       of forming a further stone by almost one third (30 to 40%) 
                   •  In addition, a normal calcium, low-salt, low-protein dietary intake 
                       can reduce your risk of stone formation even further  
                How much do I need to drink? 
                Drinking plenty of fluid is the most 
                effective way of preventing stone 
                formation and reduces your risk of 
                stone formation by almost one third 
                (30 to 40%).  Not drinking enough 
                can cause your urine to become 
                concentrated, making stones more 
                likely to form. 
                 
                Try to drink two to three litres 
                (four to six pints) of fluid (water or squash) each day.  You should aim to 
                keep your urine colourless throughout the day.  This should give you a 
                urine output of at least two litres (four pints) per day.  If you have cystine 
                 
                                                  
                 Published: April 2017                                               Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 1 
                  Due for review: April 2020       © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                stones, you will need to drink enough to produce more than four litres of 
                urine each day.  
                 
                You can drink tea, coffee & alcohol in moderation, but most of your fluid 
                intake should be water or squash.  We recommend that you drink one or 
                two glasses of water before going to bed, and on getting up in the morning. 
                 
                Tips to help you increase your fluid intake are: 
                    •  drink a large glass of water at specific times each day (e.g. when 
                        you get up, when you arrive at work, after using the toilet etc); 
                    •  keep a bottle or jug of water by your side all day; you can flavour it 
                        with fruit squash; 
                    •  try to drink one glass of water every hour; 
                    •  add slices of lemon, lime or orange to cold water; this gives it a 
                        pleasant flavour and helps to make your urine less acidic; 
                    •  eat more fruit & vegetables because they contain a lot of water; 
                        and 
                    •  include moist / liquid foods in your diet (e.g. soup, stew & jelly). 
                Does what I eat influence stone formation? 
                What you eat is not as important as how much you drink, but it does play a 
                part in stone formation.  
                It is essential to have a well-balanced diet, avoiding too many calories. This 
                should include fresh fruit, salad and vegetables, low-fat dairy produce, and 
                whole grain products such as bread or cereals.  
                A high fibre intake is helpful, although you should not eat wheat bran 
                because of its high oxalate content.  
                Is calcium in my diet bad for stones? 
                Interestingly, reducing the amount of calcium in your diet can increase the 
                risk of stone formation, by raising oxalate levels in your urine. A daily 
                intake of up to 1000 mg per day is safe for calcium stone formers.  
                Most dietary calcium is found in dairy products (milk, yoghurt, cream and 
                cheese).  A normal, varied diet will give you about 500 mg of calcium each 
                day.  The approximate calcium contents of dairy produce are: 
                    •  milk and yoghurt – 120 mg per 100 g 
                    •  soft cheese - 400 mg per 100 g 
                    •  hard cheeses - up to 1000 mg per 100 g  
                 
                                                   
                 Published: April 2017                                                Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 2 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                If you have too much calcium in your urine, you may benefit from 
                restricting your calcium intake, but you should discuss this with your 
                urologist, specialist nurse or GP. 
                Does oxalate intake play a part in stone formation? 
                Yes. You should try to avoid oxalate-rich foods to keep the oxalate levels in 
                your urine at a normal level. You should avoid eating rhubarb, celery, 
                spinach, beetroot and sesame seeds, all of which have a very high oxalate 
                content. 
                Black tea, chocolate, nuts (including peanut butter), cocoa and carob are all 
                moderately high in oxalate.  You should take them in moderation but you do 
                not need to exclude them completely.  See below for further information. 
                Should I restrict my salt intake? 
                Yes. A high salt intake can increase calcium stone formation. Do not add salt 
                to your food at the table: use pepper, herbs, spices or vinegar as alternative 
                flavourings. You can, however, add a small amount of salt to your food 
                during cooking.  
                You should limit your intake to between 2300 and 3000 mg/day 
                (approximately one teaspoonful of salt). 
                Try to eat foods with a low salt content.  Avoid tinned, packet or processed 
                foods (e.g. soups, salted crisps or nuts, tinned meats, meat paste, smoked 
                fish and fish paste), all of which have a high salt content. 
                Is there anything else I can do to help 
                myself? 
                It is important to reduce your weight if you are 
                overweight.  Increased physical activity should be 
                part of any weight-reducing programme.  
                Remember to drink plenty of fluid and avoid 
                getting dehydrated if you sweat a lot during 
                exercise. 
                Are there any other tests you can do to 
                find out why I have made stones? 
                Yes. All patients who have had a kidney stone should have blood tests to 
                check their kidney function, and make sure that their uric acid and calcium 
                levels are not raised.  
                In high-risk stone formers (young patients and those who have had 
                repeated stones), two 24-hour urine samples should be collected to 
                 
                                                   
                 Published: April 2017                                                Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 3 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                measure the level of several chemicals in your urine. Your urologist, 
                specialist nurse or GP can tell you more about this. 
                Is there anything I can do to prevent certain types of stone? 
                Calcium oxalate stones (pictured) 
                Only 10 – 15% of oxalate in your urine comes from dietary intake.  It is not, 
                therefore, necessary to eliminate oxalate-containing foods completely from 
                your diet.  You should, however, aim for a moderate (and sensible) intake of 
                oxalates.   
                Foods which are especially high in oxalates should be consumed sparingly.  
                The following foods are known have a high oxalate content: 
                    •  tea & coffee (more than two to 
                        three cups per day) 
                    •  nuts (e.g. almonds), sesame 
                        seeds & nut products (e.g. 
                        peanut butter) 
                    •  cocoa & chocolate 
                    •  some fruit (figs, tangerines, 
                        plums, berries & currants) 
                    •  rhubarb 
                    •  soy products (tofu, soy milk, soy 
                        cheese & soy ice cream) 
                    •  some vegetables (celery, spinach, 
                        leeks, okra, parsley & beetroot) 
                Uric acid stones 
                You should try to limit your dietary intake of purines.  These are naturally-
                occurring chemicals, found in most foods, which are broken down by the 
                body into uric acid.   
                The main dietary sources of purines are: 
                    •  meat - all meats, including liver, heart, kidney, sweetbreads & 
                        meat extracts (e.g. Oxo) 
                    •  fish - especially anchovies, crab, fish roe, herring, mackerel, 
                        sardines, shrimps & whitebait 
                    •  others - yeast extracts (e.g. Bovril), beer, asparagus, cauliflower, 
                        mushrooms, peas, beans & spinach. 
                Uric acid levels are often higher in people who are overweight, so losing 
                weight can help you.  Taking the drug allopurinol, which lowers uric acid 
                levels in the blood, has not been shown to help in reducing the risk of uric 
                acid stones. 
                 
                                                   
                 Published: April 2017                                                Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 4 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                Calcium phosphate stones 
                Dietary changes have little effect on the formation of calcium phosphate 
                stones.  All the general advice above is valid but you should avoid taking 
                anything to alkalinise your urine.   
                Cranberry juice may be beneficial because it acidifies your urine and lowers 
                urine oxalate levels slightly. 
                Struvite (“triple phosphate”) stones 
                These are seen mostly in women after the menopause, and are usually due 
                to infection in your urine.  The bacteria involved (Proteus species) produce 
                an enzyme (urease) which splits urea in your urine to form ammonia.  This 
                makes the urine highly alkaline, encouraging the formation of calcium, 
                magnesium, ammonium (“triple”) phosphate stones. Once these stones 
                form, they encourage further infection, resulting in a “vicious circle” of 
                rapid stone growth. 
                A high fluid intake, low-dose antibiotics (as necessary) and acidification of 
                the urine are all effective, but the main aim is to get rid of all your stones, 
                which eliminates the potential for recurrent urinary infections. 
                Drugs (urease inhibitors) are available that block the enzyme produced by 
                the bacteria, but they are not normally used because of the high-risk of 
                major side-effects. 
                Cystine stones (cystinuria) 
                Simple, basic measures remain the most important way of preventing 
                cystine stone formation: 
                    •  increase your fluid intake - you 
                        must drink enough fluid to produce 
                        two or three litres of urine per day; 
                        this usually means you need to get up 
                        at night to drink water 
                    •  modify your diet - reduce your 
                        intake of methionine (from which 
                        cystine is formed) by cutting your 
                        animal protein intake 
                    •  alkalinise your urine - this 
                        encourages cystine to dissolve in your 
                        urine.  We normally do this using 
                        potassium citrate; this tastes 
                        unpleasant, and some patients can 
                        only tolerate it by flavouring it with fruit juice 
                 
                                                   
                 Published: April 2017                                                Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 5 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                          •  monitor your urine acidity (pH) - using special pH dipsticks, to 
                               be sure that your urine stays alkaline. Your urologist or specialist 
                               nurse can supply you with these 
                     Drugs are available for the treatment of cystine stones, but are only used in 
                     patients with: 
                          •  very rapid & frequent stone formation; 
                          •  a frequent need for surgical intervention; or 
                          •  poor compliance with, or a poor response to, the measures above.   
                     Drug treatment must be very closely monitored for side-effects; the agents 
                     used include: 
                          •  tiopronin (-mercaptopropionylglycine, Thiola™ or Acadione™) -
                               this is not licensed in the UK but it is available under special 
                               agreement.  It binds to cystine molecules forming a more soluble 
                               compound which is easily excreted in the urine 
                          •  d-penicillamine (Distamine™) - the same mode of action as 
                               tiopronin but with a higher risk of side-effects 
                          •  captopril (Capoten™) - normally used to treat high blood pressure 
                               but relatively ineffective, and only used if the drugs above are 
                               unsuitable. 
                     What sources have we used to prepare this leaflet? 
                     This leaflet uses information from consensus panels and other evidence-
                     based sources including: 
                          •  the                                                               
                                     Department of Health (England);
                          •  the Cochrane Collaboration; and 
                          •  the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE).  
                     It also follows style guidelines from:  
                          •  the                                                                                         
                                     Royal National Institute for Blind People (RNIB);
                          •  the Information Standard; 
                          •  the Patient Information Forum; and 
                          •  the Plain English Campaign. 
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                                                                  
                      Published: April 2017                                                                     Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 6 
                       Due for review: April 2020                   © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                Disclaimer 
                We have made every effort to give accurate information in this leaflet, but 
                there may still be errors or omissions.  BAUS cannot accept responsibility 
                for any loss from action taken (or not taken) as a result of this information.  
                                                       PLEASE NOTE 
                 The staff at BAUS are not medically trained, and are unable to answer 
                 questions about the information provided in this leaflet.  If you do have 
                  any questions, you should contact your urologist, specialist nurse or GP. 
                 
                                                   
                 Published: April 2017                                                Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 7 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
