         
         
                         Surgical day centre  
                        Welcome brochure 
                                    
                                                           
                         
                      B5003 2017                                      Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
                       
                      You will soon be admitted to our surgical day centre. We wish you a warm welcome! 
                        
                      More and more treatments and procedures can be provided without an overnight stay. You will be 
                      admitted in the morning and you will be able to go home on the same day. Short admissions can be 
                      handled smoothly and comfortably in our surgical day centre. 
                        
                      This brochure contains a lot of practical information. Please read the guidelines carefully and follow 
                      the guidelines. They are important for ensuring that the day runs smoothly and you recover well. 
                      Our physicians and staff will be happy to make your stay as pleasant as possible. They are always 
                      willing to answer additional questions. 
                        
                      We thank you for your trust and wish you a quick recovery. 
                        
                      The Board of Directors, management, physicians and employees 
                       
                      Contents  
                       
                      Your admission                                                      1 
                      The procedure (surgery)                                             4 
                      Types of anaesthesia                                                6 
                      Possible side effects                                               7 
                      Day admission of a child                                            8 
                      Going home                                                          9 
                      Your safety                                                         10 
                      Financial information                                               11 
                      Rights, questions, complaints                                       13 
                                 
                       
                       
                      Your admission 
                       
                      The day before your surgery 
                       
                      In the surgical day centre, we want to provide you with as much information as possible. We also try 
                      to keep waiting times as short as possible. Therefore, a receptionist will call you the day before your 
                      admission to make some arrangements with you. We ask you to be available from 12.00 (midday on 
                      the day before your surgery). In case of admission on a Monday, we will call you on the Friday before 
                      your admission. We must also be able to reach you by phone on the morning of your admission. 
                      The receptionist will tell you 
                                at what time you are expected for your admission; 
                                whether you must be sober (being sober= you cannot eat / drink after midnight of the day 
                                before surgery) 
                                until when you can take your home medication. 
                      Our employee will also ask you for the name of the person who will be accompanying you (see page 
                      5). 
                       
                                                                                                                                                                      1 
         B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
          
         Please inform us when you cannot make it to your admission at the agreed day of time due to 
         unforeseen circumstances: 052 25 22 00 (available between 07:00 and 17:45).  
         Has your phone number changed recently? Please let us know: 052 25 22 00. 
          
         The day itself 
         The surgical day centre is located in a separate wing connected to the main building. 
          
         •    Do you come by car? 
         Take the main entrance of az Sint-Blasius. After 100 meters, you will see a turn to the right, follow 
         the arrows towards the day centre. 
               If the person accompanying you drives away immediately, he/she may drop you off at the 
              ‘kiss & ride zone’, in front of the entrance to the day centre. 
               If the person accompanying you waits for you in our hospital, he/she can park in the 
              underground parking area underneath the day centre. This parking area may only be used by 
              patients of the surgical day centre. Parking here is completely free (please validate your 
              ticket at the reception desk). 
          
         •    If you are coming on foot 
         Take the main entrance of az Sint-Blasius and follow route 115 on the ground floor (level 0) to the 
         day centre. 
          
         What should you bring with you for the admission?  
              1. For administrative purposes 
                        Your Electronic Identity Card (EID) 
                        If you do not have an EID (for example a child under 12 years old):  
                       ISI+ card or SIS card and stickers from the health insurance fund 
                        If you have hospital insurance:  
                       your insurance card and/or the contact details of the insurer 
                       It is important that you inform the insurer yourself before your admission. 
                        In the event of a work-place accident: 
                       -   Name and address of your employer 
                       -   Name and policy number of the employer’s insurance company  
                        If you are not affiliated with a Belgian health insurance fund:  
                       a European insurance card or E112 
              Do you have questions about the registration of your admission? Call us at 052 25 22 00. 
               
              2. For the physician specialist 
         This brochure contains three separate documents: 
               A green sheet with a consent form: you must fill this in yourself 
               A yellow information form for the anaesthetists:  
              you must fill this in yourself, possibly with your GP (= General Practitioner, your own doctor 
              at home) 
               A white 'pre-operative record' information sheet: this sheet must be filled in by your GP or by 
              the anaesthetist during the pre-operative consult (see page 4). 
           
                                                                       2 
         B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
          
         Please bring the completed and signed forms together with the results of the preliminary tests (see 
         page 4) to the hospital on the day of your surgery. You do not need to send them in advance. 
          
              3. Practical information 
         You do not need to bring pyjamas or sleepwear.  
         Please remove cosmetics, jewellery, piercings and nail polish before comming to the hospital.  
         Leave all valuable belongings at home.  
         If you wear contact lenses or dentures, bring something to store them in.  
         If you have your own anti-thrombosis stockings, bring them to the hospital. 
          
                                                           
          
         - - -  Day centre parking instructions  
         The surgical day centre is located in a separate wing of our hospital. It has its own parking area 
         (underground) and its own reception area (ground floor). 
         - - -  General hospital parking instructions 
         1 Day centre entrance; Kiss & Ride 
         2 Day centre underground parking entrance 
         3 Main entrance of the general hospital 
         4 General hospital visitors' parking area entrance 
         5 Emergency services entrance 
          
                                                                       3 
           B5003 2017               Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
            
            
                 Opening hours 
                       The surgical day centre itself:                  08:00 to 16:00 
                       Reception of the surgical day centre:    07:30 to 17:00 
                       After-care area:                                          08.30 to 17.45 
            
            
               
            
           Preparatory tests and pre-operative consult 
            
           A few preparatory tests often have to be carried out to prepare for an operation (for example blood 
           sampling, heart examination, photo of the lungs, ...). Your GP is responsible for coordinating the 
           tests for you. The tests must take place at least 3 days before your admission, so make an 
           appointment as soon as possible. Your GP give you the tests results and a completed questionnaire. 
           Bring these with you on the day of admission. 
             
           The tests can also be done at az Sint-Blasius.  
           Please contact the admission planning department (052 25 25 74). 
             
           Before your planned surgery, you can also visit the anaesthesia department for a "pre-operative 
           consult", a consultation with an anaesthetist (= anaesthesia: see page6).  
           Either you, the surgeon or your GP can make an appointment for a pre-operative consult with an 
           anaesthetist. 
            
           Pre-operative consult - practical information: 
                       
                       Every Thursday from 16:00 to 18:00 (Dendermonde campus) 
                       An appointment can be made via the appointments office: 052 25 25 05 
                       Please bring the following items: the results of the preparatory tests, information 
                      about home medication, the completed questionnaire and (possibly) recent reports 
                      from specialists outside our hospital. 
            
            
           The day of the surgery 
            
           Reception 
           Come to reception desk of the surgical day centre (route 115, ground floor). The receptionist will 
           register you. You will receive the following documents: 
                 A follow-up sheet 
                 A medication form 
                 A statement for your employer or for your school. 
           The receptionist will ask you which certificates and documents you need (for example: incapacity for 
           work, school and/or gym leave, social leave for your partner or family member, health insurance 
           fund certificate, hospital insurance, ...).  
           If you ask for the necessary documents before the procedure, they will be ready at discharge. 
            
                                                                                      4 
         B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
          
         After registration 
         Take a seat in the waiting room. A nurse will come to pick you up. He/she will take you to the 
         dressing room, where you will undress and put on the surgical gown we will give you. Your personal 
         clothes and shoes will be stored in a locker for which you will be given the key. From the changing 
         room, you will go to the preparation area in the operating room. 
          
         In the preparation area 
               The nurse inserts an IV (intravenous = within vein) and may possibly give you antibiotics 
               He/she will put stickers on your chest to monitor your heart rate 
               If necessary, the anaesthetist will start regional anaesthetics (see page 6) 
         The further course of the procedure depends on the type of anaesthesia and the procedure itself. 
          
         The recovery room 
         After the procedure, depending on the type of anaesthesia, you will be taken  
               either to the recovery room, for observation 
              No visitors are allowed in this room (except for the surgery of children: one parent or 
              accompanying person is allowed in this room). 
               or immediately to the aftercare area where you can wake up quietly 
              Your accompanying person is allowed in this area. 
         In the recovery room, you will be monitored by an anaesthetist and a team of specialist nurses until 
         the effect of the anaesthesia is almost completely gone. All important body functions are regularly 
         monitored. Usually, we will give you extra oxygen through a cannula or a mask. 
          
         Important 
         For all surgery in the surgical day centre, it is important that you are accompanied by someone. You 
         cannot go home alone after your surgery; an adult person must be available to pick you up and take 
         you home. The person accompanying you must also be available by telephone on the day of the 
         admission. Please give his/her telephone number to the receptionist upon registration.  
         When you go to the operating room, the person accompanying you should remain close to the 
         hospital, to be here quickly if you are able to go home sooner than expected.  
         He/she can also wait for you in our cafeteria during your surgery (see page 9). 
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
                                                                       5 
               B5003 2017                       Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
                What is anaesthesia? 
                 
                The word 'anaesthesia' means ‘unable to feel pain'. However, anaesthesia involves more than that. 
                The anaesthetist will ensure that you get through the operation as safely as possible, even if you 
                are weakened or if the operation lasts longer than expected. A surgical procedure may impact 
                different systems of organs (heart, lungs, gastrointestin system, hormonal system, blood 
                composition, ....). The anaesthetist will protect you against these effects and will get you through 
                the operation safely. 
                
               Types of anaesthesia for an operation  
                
               General anaesthesia 
               This type of anaesthesia makes you unconscious and insensitive to pain. The anaesthetist uses 
               products that work on the brain. These products are given through an IV (intravenous) and put you in 
               a state of artificial sleep that is very different from natural sleep. The anaesthetist will constantly 
               monitor you during the operation. The depth of sleep, respiration, heart rate, body temperature, 
               blood loss, ... are continuously monitored and adjusted when needed. 
                
               Sedation 
               This type of anaesthesia uses highly sedative medication and (sometimes) strong painkillers. The 
               anaesthetist uses the same safety precautions as for general anaesthesia. This type is often used for 
               unpleasant or painful test methods or in combination with local and regional anaesthesia. 
                
               Regional or local anaesthesia        
               Local anaesthesia involves injecting local anaesthetics into nerves. As a consequence, the part of the 
               body that contains those particular nerves will be made insensitive to pain. This is often accompanied 
               by a loss of function in that body part. 
               The nervous function recovers slowly after regional anaesthesia. This can sometimes take several 
               hours. You must always ask advice from a nurse before using this specific part of your body. 
                 
               Despite the fact that the regional anaesthetic techniques are applied with the necessary care and 
               knowledge, they may sometimes not work properly. In such cases, the anaesthetist will apply 
               additional sedation or general anaesthesia. Depending on which part of your body the local 
               anaesthetic product is injected, this type of anaesthesia is called: 
                
               Spinal anaesthesia 
               An injection in the back through the membrane that separates the epidural space from the spinal 
               space, injecting the product into the space in which the spinal cord fluid is located. 
                
               Epidural anaesthesia 
               An injection in the back whereby the membrane is not pierced and the product is injected into the 
               space that is in front of the membrane (= epidural space). 
                
               Peripheral nerve blocks 
                      an injection in the neck to anaesthetise the shoulder 
                                                                                                                  6 
            B5003 2017                Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
             
                  an injection in the armpit to anaesthetise the forearm and hand 
                  an injection in the groin to anaesthetise the upper leg and knee 
                  an injection in the back of the knee to anaesthetise the lower leg and foot 
             
            You must have fasted before procedures with regional or general anaesthesia or sedation (= do not 
            eat or drink anything after midnight). It is best to have someone stay with you during the first night 
            after surgery with general anaesthesia. 
             
            Possible side effects after surgery 
            Pain 
            Pain that is not relieved can slow down or complicate your recovery. Therefore , in our hospital, we 
            pay extra attention to pain and keeping pain under control. It is important that you have as little pain 
            as possible. The nurses will ask if you feel pain and will write down your pain score. The scores range 
            from '0' (which means that you have no pain) to '10' (which is the most severe pain you can imagine). 
            If necessary, we will start a modified pain management. It is not always possible to completely 
            remove the pain you feel, but it can be brought down to an acceptable level. If you still feel pain, 
            regardless of its location, you must tell us. 
             
            Nausea and vomiting 
            These side effects are the result of the products used during the anaesthesia, but they may also be 
            caused by the operation itself. In some surgeries (for example abdominal surgery) there is a higher 
            risk of developing nausea than in other interventions. The anaesthetist has various products and 
            methods for preventing and treating nausea. 
             
            Sore throat 
            This side effect sometimes occurs when a tube has been put in the airway or in the stomach. This 
            painful feeling may last for several hours or several days but can be controlled with painkillers and 
            tablets. 
             
            Dental damage 
            During general anaesthesia, a tube is placed in your throat (after you have been brought asleep). This 
            may be very difficult for some patients and may lead to damage to the teeth. If your teeth are loose 
            or in poor condition, there is a greater risk of dental damage. Please inform the anaesthetist of this 
            before the operation. 
             
            Shivering 
            Shivers after surgery are the result of heat loss during the surgery, but may also be caused by certain 
            medication or stress. This can be treated with a warm air mattress and/or with medication. 
             
            Confusion or memory loss 
            This is more common with elderly patients after surgery. Confusion and memory loss are usually 
            temporary, but can sometimes last several days or weeks. 
             
             
                                                                                         7 
         B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
          
         Difficulties in urinating 
         After some operations, patients, and men in particular, may experience difficulties in urinating. This 
         goes away by itself. 
          
         If you experience any problems whatsoever, talk to the doctor or nurse. 
          
          
         Day admission of a child 
          
         Prepare your child for the admission as best as possible 
         Children who need surgery require additional attention and reassurance. Talk about a hospital 
         admission as something that can happen to anyone. Talk to you child about how a hospital works and 
         about the procedure itself, without going into too much detail. Keep the information simple and 
         honest.  
         Normally, your child can go home the same evening. However, you must keep in mind that in some 
         cases admission to the paediatric ward is necessary. In this case, your child will be transferred to the 
         paediatric ward in the main building of our hospital. Bring a soft toy or a familiar toy for your child.  
         If your baby drinks a bottle than you must also bring baby milk powder.  
         You can accompany your child into the operating room up until the anaesthesia has been given (until 
         your child is asleep). You may also be there when your child wakes up. Brothers and sisters are not 
         allowed to be present. 
          
         Practical arrangements 
                 To prepare for an operation under general anaesthesia, you must take your child to 
                your home doctor or paediatrician (doctor specialised in treating babies and childern) for 
                a medical examination. Your general practitioner/paediatrician will give the report with 
                you to the az Sint-Blasius. Please complete the questionnaire with the consent form and 
                bring it with you to the hospital. 
                 Your child must fast before the surgery (= not eat or drink anything after midnight). If 
                your child is still a baby (infant): follow the instructions given by your doctor. 
                 Before your child enters the operating room, he/she will receive medication to make 
                him/her calmer. 
                 Do not give your child anything to eat or drink on your own initiative during his/her stay 
                in the day centre.  Always ask a nurse for advice. 
                 In the evening after returning home, you should give your child easily digestible food (a 
                sandwich, yoghurt, ...). Also, makes sure your child drinks enough. 
                 Before bedtime, you may give your child another painkiller (see pain schedule that you 
                will receive in a separate folder). 
                 In case of vomiting, fever or anxiety, contact your GP, the surgeon or the paediatric 
                department (052 25 22 83). 
          
          
          
                                                                       8 
          B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
           
          Good to know 
           
          Restaurant 
          route 130, ground floor   
          Open from 09:00 to 19:30 (weekdays) and from 10:00 to 18:30 (weekend and holidays)  
          The restaurant serves warm meals twice per day: from 11:00 to 14:00 and from 16:30 to 18:45  
          (17:45 during the weekend / holidays) 
           
          Shop 
          Near the main entrance, ground floor. 
          Open from 08:30 to 19:30 (weekdays) and from 14:00 to 17:30 (weekend and holidays).  
          The shop offers a varied range of flowers, fruit, newspapers, magazines and small gifts. 
           
          Mobile phone  
          You may bring your mobile phone to the day centre. During the operation, you must leave the cell 
          phone with your clothes in the locker. When you get dressed again, you can take your phone with 
          you and use it. In the interest of your fellow patients, we request you to limit using your phone and 
          to talk quietly. 
           
          Smoking ban  
          Smoking is not allowed anywhere in the hospital (rooms, corridors, waiting rooms, ....).  
          Using e-cigarettes is not allowed either (according to the Belgian Act of 22/12/2009).  
          Smoking is only allowed between 7:00 and 21:00 in the outside covered area, next to the main 
          entrance of the hospital. It is not possible to smoke between 21:00 and 07:00. 
           
          Do you wish to stop smoking?  
          If you want to quit smoking, or if it is difficult for you not to smoke between 21:00 and 7:00, please 
          discuss this with your doctor, or make an appointment with a ‘tabakoloog’ (=tobacco treatment 
          specialist). You can do so by contacting the hospital’s appointment desk: +32 (0)52 25 25 05. Also ask 
          for our ‘tabakoloog’ information leaflet with information on smoking cessation. 
          It is best to stop smoking as early as possible before any surgery. If you stop smoking 6 to 8 weeks 
          before the procedure, you will no longer be at risk for smoking-related complications. If you stop 
          smoking at a later stage (2 to 3 weeks before the surgery), the risks are still significantly reduced. 
          Even if you stop smoking no more than 12 to 48 hours before the procedure, you will still benefit 
          from this. 
           
           
          Going home 
           
          You will receive a report for your GP and medication for one day (or to last through the weekend). If 
          you need a check-up by the treating physician, a date will be scheduled with you.  
          As soon as your surgeon of treating physician gives permission, you may leave. You can either inform 
          the person accompanying you yourself, or we will do it for you. The person accompanying you can 
          pick you up in the follow-up care room, or (if he/she arrives later) in the reception area.  
                                                                          9 
                             B5003 2017                                                       Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
                              
                             Please tell the nurse when you leave.  
                              
                             In exceptional cases, when your medical condition requires it, your treating physician may decide 
                             that an admission is required. You will then be transferred to a room at one of our care centres. The 
                             person accompanying you will be notified of this.  
                             Before you leave, you must go to the reception desk, where you will be discharged. You do not have 
                             to pay anything there. You will receive the invoice approximately one month after the admission. 
                                          You must not use any medication other than the medication prescribed by the physician of 
                                           our hospital or your GP during the first 24 hours after the surgery. 
                                          In the evening after the surgery, you may eat a light meal (for example soup, yoghurt, 
                                           sandwich, ....). 
                                          Do not drink alcohol for 48 hours after the surgery.  
                                          If you experience any problems, or if you have any additional questions (about follow-up 
                                           care, pain management, ...), please contact your GP or the on-call GP. If necessary, he/she 
                                           may refer you to the Emergency Department. 
                              
                              
                                   Medical Head of Department Surgical Day Centre: Dr. Jo Maes 
                              
                                   Head nurse Surgical Day Centre: Ms. Kathleen Van Overwalle 
                                   Deputy Head Nurse: Ms. Katrien De Vriendt 
                              
                                   For questions about your day admission: 052 25 22 00 
                              
                                   For general questions relating to your admission: 
                                   Admission Scheduling Department: 052 25 25 74 
                              
                              
                              
                             Your safety 
                              
                             Help us provide safe care   
                             AZ Sint-Blasius tries to provide safe care to all patients. Physicians and staff do their best to make 
                             your stay as safe as possible. However, as a patient, you can also contribute to this process. Please 
                             find tips and suggestions below: 
                              
                                          Patient identification 
                             Careful patient identification contributes to your safety. For that reason, you will be given a bracelet 
                             with your last name, first name and date of birth. Check whether this information is correct. Do not 
                             remove the bracelet! If you do not have an identification bracelet, ask one. 
                              
                                          Requesting and providing information 
                             Our physicians will provide information on your conditions, the tests or treatments planned and 
                             possible risks. Please ask your physician or nurse if something remains unclear, or if you have any 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10 
           B5003 2017               Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
            
           concerns.  Be honest when providing information to our care staff. Also tell your nurse or physician 
           how you feel. 
            
           It is possible that several staff members ask you the same questions (for example allergies, correct 
           side of your body for procedures). This is done because this information is so crucial that it must be 
           checked several times. Do you feel that you are receiving contradictory information from different 
           care providers? Please say so and ask who is best placed to answer your questions. If you are about 
           to be discharged, ask for more information on your follow-up treatment after you return home. 
            
                 Time- out 
           In the operating room, before the surgery starts, the surgeon, anaesthetist and nurse will perform a 
           number of checks out loud. This safety procedure is called the 'time out' and is comparable to the 
           checks performed by pilots before takeoff. 
            
                 Medication 
           Does your medication look different to what you expected (colour, shape, ...)? Do not hesitate, and 
           immediately ask why. Refuse medication and food that you know you are allergic to. 
            
                 Preventing hospital infections 
           Proper hygiene is very important for preventing infections. In normal life, skin and mucous 
           membranes usually protect us against infections. During the surgery, these normal defences are 
           temporarily disabled. You are suddenly more at risk of infections. Therefore, it is important that you 
           wash your entire body with water and soap (including your hair) the day before the admission and on 
           the day of the admission. If the surgery is on the hands or feet, pay extra attention to clean nails. You 
           can wash yourself at the sink or in the bath, but it is better to take a shower (as better rinsing is 
           ensured). 
            
           AZ Sint-Blasius has implemented a strict policy to avoid transmission of germs between patients. This 
           policy includes training sessions, guidelines and thorough hand hygiene. It is of the utmost 
           importance that our nurses and physicians comply with these guidelines. 
            
           Financial information 
            
              1.  Cost of the stay 
                 If you are up to date with your health insurance fund payments, the hosptial stay will be 
                 billed directly to your health insurance fund. You do not pay a personal contribution or lump 
                 sum (as opposed to traditional hospital admissions with an overnight stay). 
                 If you are not up to date with your health insurance fund payments, all costs will be billed to 
                 you. If you have any questions about this, please contact the reception staff at the day centre 
                 (052 25 22 00). 
                 If you cannot be present on the day of your admission, please let us know in advance (24 
                 hours beforehand). This will prevent us from billing you a cancellation fee (25.00 EUR). 
            
            
                                                                                    11 
         B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
          
            2.  Supplements  
               Room Supplements: If you choose to stay in a single room, you will be billed a room 
              supplement (55 EUR). 
               Supplementary fees: If you choose to stay in a single room, the physician and the 
              anaesthetist may charge you a 100% supplementary fee. 
               Other supplementary fees: Some non-affiliated physicians may (subject to prior written 
              agreement) charge a supplementary fee. You do not pay this supplementary fee directly to 
              the physician; the hospital charges it to you afterwards. 
               You must pay for supplements and non-reimbursable therapeutic services, unless you have 
              additional insurance that fully or partially covers such costs. Please inform your insurance 
              company in advance.  
         You can ask for an overview of the non-affiliated doctors, possible supplements and non-
         reimbursable therapeutic services. 
          
          
         A stay in a single room provides greater comfort and privacy but does not affect the quality of care. 
         The care provided is the same in all rooms.  
          
         You will not pay a supplement for a single room if you stay for medical reasons, or if you have not 
         asked for a single room. 
          
          
         3. Pharmaceutical costs 
               For medication, the legal reimbursement categories apply. 
               You must pay the cost of non-reimbursable medication and products that are not 
              pharmaceutical specialties, unless you have additional insurance that fully or partially covers 
              such costs. Ask for more information from your insurance company in advance. 
           
          
         Any questions? 
         You can ask the billing department staff for an estimate of the cost of your surgery and hospital stay. 
         They can give you a price indication. The amount of the final invoice is influenced by various factors 
         that cannot be predicted in advance (for example length of stay, additional tests, medication, ....). 
          
         Contact details: 
               For a cost simulation and for questions about your invoice, co-payment, ....: 
              Billing department 052 25 24 30 
              facturatie@azsintblasius.be  
              Every weekday between 9.00 and 15.45 
               For questions concerning reminders, payment in instalments, ....: 
              Accounting department 052 25 24 13 
              debiteuren@azsintblasius.be 
         Financial information can also be found on our website: 
         www.azsintblasius.be/patiënten/financieel  
          
          
                                                                      12 
           B5003 2017              Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
            
           Rights, questions and complaints 
            
           Patient rights and obligations 
           As a patient, you have a number of rights. In Belgium, these rights have been legally defined since 
           2002. You have the following rights: 
                       right to quality care and, if so desired, to participation in the care process; 
                       right to freely choose your care provider and right to a second opinion (from a 
                      different physician) 
                       right to information regarding your health 
                       right to freely consent to a procedure or treatment, after having been informed    
                       right to have a carefully maintained patient record, with the possibility to review this 
                      record or receive a copy (see below) 
                       right to the protection of your privacy 
                       right to register a complaint with the ombudsdepartment 
                       right to the necessary pain management 
            
           However, our care providers also expect some things from you. In order to let us provide you with 
           the best possible medical care, it is necessary that you, as the patient, respect a number of rules as 
           well, including: 
                       providing correct information on your identity 
                       collaborating with the care providers and collaborating in your treatment    
                       respecting the care providers 
                       being careful with materials and equipment 
                       paying for your treatment 
                       complying with the hospital rules (for example regarding visiting hours and non-
                      smoking policy) 
            
           For more information, please see the ‘Patient rights and patient obligations’ brochure. You can get it 
           at the reception desk or from the ombudsdepartment, or you can read it on our website. 
            
           Patient records 
           The hospital creates a record for each patient containing medical, paramedical and nursing 
           information.  
           The patient record is strictly confidential. All our employees are bound to confidentiality obligations. 
           As a patient, you can ask your treating physician for additional information, and you can ask them to 
           look at your record together with you. If necessary, you can request the medical secretariat to send 
           you a copy of your record or part thereof (tel. +32 (0)52 25 28 19). In that case, you will pay the price 
           for the copy.  
           If a patient dies, only medical professionals are allowed to review the patient’s record. 
            
           If you would like a copy of your record as part of a complaint, you can ask the ombudsdepartment.  
            
           Physicians, nurses and other care providers working in AZ Sint-Blasius can review your record, if they 
           are directly involved in your treatment and only for the duration of your treatment. 
                                                                                   13 
         B5003 2017           Welcome brochure – surgical day centre 
          
          
         Your GP and specialists from other hospitals can also review your record under the same conditions. 
         These persons are also bound to professional confidentiality obligations. For more information, 
         please see: www.azsintblasius.be (under ‘rechten van de patiënt’). 
          
         Ombudsdepartment  
         Every day we do our best to make all of our patients’ stay as comfortable as possible. It is possible 
         however that sometimes you may not be satisfied with certain aspects of our care. Of course, it is 
         best to immediately discuss any problems with the physician, head nurse or the head of the 
         department. If you cannot find a solution with the person involved, you can talk to the 
         ombudsdepartment. The ombudsperson serves as a link between the patient and/or their family and 
         the hospital. The ombudsperson serves as a mediator and ensures a customer-oriented handling of 
         the complaint. 
          
         For information, questions or comments to the ombudsperson, please ask at the reception desk, route 
         1, campus Dendermonde. 
          
         Contact 
         Tel. +32 052 25 28 68 
         ombudsdienst@azsintblasius.be 
          
         The hospital is liable for all medical professionals working in the hospital. This is also called the 
         hospital’s central liability. This means that a complaint against any medical professional can be filed 
         at one central point (the hospital’s ombudsperson). 
          
          
         Hospital rules 
         You can review the hospital rules at the reception desk (at both Dendermonde campus and Zele 
         campus). 
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
                 O.L. Vrouw van Troost vzw Campus Dendermonde Kroonveldlaan 50, 9200 Dendermonde  
              T. 052 25 20 11 | F. 052 25 24 10 Campus Zele Koevliet 5-6, 9240 Zele T. 052 45 64 00 | F. 052 45 64 99 
          
                                                                      14 
