                   Electricity
                   Gas
                   Heat
                   Water
                   An explanation of your invoice
                   General:
                   Page 1 of the invoice provides you with a quick summary of the main items in the annual settlement. In particular, these are the  
                   settlement period, the invoice sum, payments made, the new instalments derived from these and the dates on which they are due.  
                   All the data relevant for determining the invoice sum are listed on the following pages. This calculation statement contains a technical 
                   part showing the meter data, and a commercial part (basis of calculation), so that you are able to see how each item in the invoice 
                   sum has been established.
                   Annual statement of account, page 1 (overview)
                     1   Customer no.
                          The customer no. is the most important identiifcation feature.  
                         We can process your enquiries more quickly if you provide it du-
                         ring calls and in correspondence. If it is not entered, or wrongly 
                         entered, on your money transfer form, for example, we cannot 
                         identify your payment and your account cannot be settled. This                                 Max Mustermann
                                                                                                                        Gederner Str. 99
                         could lead to measures that could involve costs and, in extreme                                60435 Frankfurt
                         cases, cutting off the supply. So please always provide us with 
                         the correct and complete customer no. when you phone us 
                         or write to us – and particularly when you pay us.
                                                                                                                                                                 1            P 2000 0000 000
                     2   Settlement period
                         This is the total time period covered by your annual statement.  
                         The beginning and end dates are identical with the old and new                             2
                         meter-reading dates you can ifnd in the technical portion of the  
                         calculation details.                                                                       3
                     3   Invoice information
                         The most important invoice results are presented here. At a                                4
                         glance, you can see what types of energy we provide you with
                         (heat and/or hot water). In the line marked ‘Invoice Amount’                               5
                         [Rechnungsbetrag] you can see at the far right what charges  
                         your energy consumption has caused. The amount you have  
                         already paid by way of advance payments (payments made
                         for energy consumption) will be offset against this amount.
                         This generates either a remaining amount payable or a credit.  
                         Last entry date: we entered the last incoming payment on this  
                         date. This will enable you to assess whether we have been  
                         able to factor in your last payment or not.
                     4   Posting and payment information                                                                                                  Annual statement, page 1 (overview)
                         If you pay the invoice and advance-payment amounts via bank  
                         transfer, we take this opportunity to remind you that we expect 
                         the incoming payment to our demands at the latest by the due date stated here. If you have provided us with a direct-debit  
                         mandate (this is already the case for approx. 80 percent of our customers), we inform you here of the bank and account from  
                         which the invoice or advance-payment amount will be debited on the due date. For reasons of data protection, only the last four  
                         digits of the account no. are shown here. Please review this information. You have two weeks from receipt of the invoice in which  
                         to have these data corrected. We will of course transfer any credit to your account at short notice, or if we have no account  
                         details for you we kindly request that you provide us with them. 
                     5   Advance-payment information
                         Here, you can see the amount of your future monthly advance-payment.
           Date: 04.2012 · Page 1
                   www.mainova.de
