                   Electricity
                   Gas
                   Heat
                   Water
                   An explanation of your invoice
                   General:
                   Page 1 of the invoice provides you with a quick summary of the main items in the annual settlement. In particular, these are the  
                   settlement period, the invoice sum, payments made, the new instalments derived from these and the dates on which they are due.  
                   All the data relevant for determining the invoice sum are listed on the following pages. This calculation statement contains a technical 
                   part showing the meter data, and a commercial part (basis of calculation), so that you are able to see how each item in the invoice 
                   sum has been established.
                   Annual statement of account, page 1 (overview)
                     1   Customer no.
                          The customer no. is the most important identiifcation feature.  
                         We can process your enquiries more quickly if you provide it du-
                         ring calls and in correspondence. If it is not entered, or wrongly 
                         entered, on your money transfer form, for example, we cannot 
                         identify your payment and your account cannot be settled. This                                 Max Mustermann
                                                                                                                        Gederner Str. 99
                         could lead to measures that could involve costs and, in extreme                                60435 Frankfurt
                         cases, cutting off the supply. So please always provide us with 
                         the correct and complete customer no. when you phone us 
                         or write to us – and particularly when you pay us.
                                                                                                                                                                 1            P 2000 0000 000
                     2   Settlement period
                         This is the total time period covered by your annual statement.  
                         The beginning and end dates are identical with the old and new                             2
                         meter-reading dates you can ifnd in the technical portion of the  
                         calculation details.                                                                       3
                     3   Invoice information
                         The most important invoice results are presented here. At a                                4
                         glance, you can see what types of energy we provide you with
                         (heat and/or hot water). In the line marked ‘Invoice Amount’                               5
                         [Rechnungsbetrag] you can see at the far right what charges  
                         your energy consumption has caused. The amount you have  
                         already paid by way of advance payments (payments made
                         for energy consumption) will be offset against this amount.
                         This generates either a remaining amount payable or a credit.  
                         Last entry date: we entered the last incoming payment on this  
                         date. This will enable you to assess whether we have been  
                         able to factor in your last payment or not.
                     4   Posting and payment information                                                                                                  Annual statement, page 1 (overview)
                         If you pay the invoice and advance-payment amounts via bank  
                         transfer, we take this opportunity to remind you that we expect 
                         the incoming payment to our demands at the latest by the due date stated here. If you have provided us with a direct-debit  
                         mandate (this is already the case for approx. 80 percent of our customers), we inform you here of the bank and account from  
                         which the invoice or advance-payment amount will be debited on the due date. For reasons of data protection, only the last four  
                         digits of the account no. are shown here. Please review this information. You have two weeks from receipt of the invoice in which  
                         to have these data corrected. We will of course transfer any credit to your account at short notice, or if we have no account  
                         details for you we kindly request that you provide us with them. 
                     5   Advance-payment information
                         Here, you can see the amount of your future monthly advance-payment.
           Date: 04.2012 · Page 1
                   www.mainova.de
                Electricity
                Gas
                Heat
                Water
                Annual statement of account, page 2  
                (calculation statement)
                 6   Technical part (meter data and consumption calculation)
                     This section records all the data required to establish your  
                     consumption. Namely the type of supply, the invoicing period            6
                     and the point of consumption. If your radiators are iftted with  
                     electronic heating cost distributors, the metered units are then 
                     multiplied by a factor (size and model of the radiator). In the case 
                     of evaporators, consumption is generally read off from the line 
                 markings.
                 7   Your direct costs
                      The direct costs concern the individual settlement per apartment. 
                     They serve as evidence of the proportionate costs invoiced to           7
                     you. Depending on the type of cost concerned, the metered con-
                                                                      2
                     sumption costs are assigned the multiplier per m , the multiplier 
                     per line marking/unit, and for the cost type consumption of hot 
                                               3
                     water the multiplier per m , each to the precise day.
                 8    The net amounts calculated under 7 are summed up in the  
                     total net costs. These are your costs for heating and hot water 
                     (see net invoice sum page 1)                                            8
                Annual statement of account, page 3                                                                Annual statement, page 2 (calculation statement)
                (calculation statement)
                 9   Calculation of total consumption
                      This section contains the data required to determine the total 
                     consumption of the billed property. The numbers of the meters           9
                     and the „old“ and „new“ meter readings are recorded, divided 
                     into room heating and hot water, for the complete settlement 
                     period. The difference this produces is subsequently converted  
                     to the billing unit.
                10   Determination of total costs                                           10
                     The determination of total costs illustrated shows how the costs  
                     of the billed property are composed. The basis for this is the 
                     complete settlement period. In line with the tariff, the costs are 
                     determined for the work, base and accounting prices and for 
                     operating the system in consideration of the current prices.  
                     The net sums calculated are summed up in the total net costs           11
                     to be distributed.
                11   Division of costs for room heating and hot water
                     The total costs established under point 10 are now divided into        12
                     the costs for room heating and hot water.
                12   Distribution of costs
                      Depending on the agreement made with the owner/administrator 
                     of the facility, the total costs are divided into the so-called: 
                                                        2
                     1)   Base costs – the amount per m  is calculated, in that the  
                                                                                   2
                        base costs are divided by the total utility area (generally m )  
                        of the property
                     2)  Consumption costs – the amount per unit is calculated, in that 
                        the consumption costs are divided by the total units for room                              Annual statement, page 3 (calculation statement)
                                                  3
                        heating and by the total m  of the facility for hot water.
         Date: 04.2012 · Page 2
                www.mainova.de
