                 The O
                         utsi
                 The O        ders 
                         utsi
                              ders 
                 The O
                         utsi
                              ders 
                       S. E. Hinton 
                           
                           
                                    
         
        According to Wikipedia, The Outsiders is a coming-of-age novel by S. E. Hinton, first 
        published in 1967 by Viking Press. Hinton was 15 when she started writing the novel, but 
        did most of the work when she was sixteen and a junior in high school. Hinton was 18 
        when the book was published.  
         
        The book follows two rival groups, the Greasers and the Socs who are divided by their 
        socioeconomic status. 
         
        The book takes place in Tulsa, Oklahoma, in 1965, but it is never stated in the book.
               
                                         Chapter Index 
              Chapter 1............................................................................................................................. 3 
              Chapter 2........................................................................................................................... 18 
              Chapter 3........................................................................................................................... 33 
              Chapter 4........................................................................................................................... 47 
              Chapter 5........................................................................................................................... 59 
              Chapter 6........................................................................................................................... 73 
              Chapter 7........................................................................................................................... 85 
              Chapter 8......................................................................................................................... 101 
              Chapter 9......................................................................................................................... 112 
              Chapter 10....................................................................................................................... 128 
              Chapter 11....................................................................................................................... 138 
              Chapter 12....................................................................................................................... 143 
               
              The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	                            2  	
                                         
                                   Chapter 1 
                 WHEN I STEPPED OUT into the bright sunlight from the darkness of the movie 
            house, I had only two things on my mind: Paul Newman and a ride home. I was wishing I 
            looked like Paul Newman--- he looks tough and I don't--- but I guess my own looks aren't 
            so bad. I have light-brown, almost-red hair and greenish-gray eyes. I wish they were 
            more gray, because I hate most guys that have green eyes, but I have to be content with 
            what I have. My hair is longer than a lot of boys wear theirs, squared off in back and long 
            at the front and sides, but I am a greaser and most of my neighborhood rarely bothers to 
            get a haircut. Besides, I look better with long hair. 
                 I had a long walk home and no company, but I usually lone it anyway, for no 
            reason except that I like to watch movies undisturbed so I can get into them and live them 
            with the actors. When I see a movie with someone it's kind of uncomfortable, like having 
            someone read your book over your shoulder. I'm different that way. I mean, my second-
            oldest brother, Soda, who is sixteen-going-on-seventeen, never cracks a book at all, and 
            my oldest brother, Darrel, who we call Darry, works too long and hard to be interested in 
            a story or drawing a picture, so I'm not like them. And nobody in our gang digs movies 
            and books the way I do. For a while there, I thought I was the only person in the world 
            that did. So I loned it. 
                 Soda tries to understand, at least, which is more than Darry does. But then, Soda 
            is different from anybody; he understands everything, almost. Like he's never hollering at 
            me all the time the way Darry is, or treating me as if I was six instead of fourteen. I love 
            Soda more than I've ever loved anyone, even Mom and Dad. He's always happy-go-lucky 
            and grinning, while Darry's hard and firm and rarely grins at all. But then, Darry's gone 
            through a lot in his twenty years, grown up too fast. Sodapop'll never grow up at all. I 
            don't know which way's the best. I'll find out one of these days. 
                 Anyway, I went on walking home, thinking about the movie, and then suddenly 
            wishing I had some company. Greasers can't walk alone too much or they'll get jumped, 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               3  	
            or someone will come by and scream "Greaser!" at them, which doesn't make you feel 
            too hot, if you know what I mean. We get jumped by the Socs. I'm not sure how you spell 
            it, but it's the abbreviation for the Socials, the jet set, the West-side rich kids. It's like the 
            term "greaser," which is used to class all us boys on the East Side. 
                 We're poorer than the Socs and the middle class. I reckon we're wilder, too. Not 
            like the Socs, who jump greasers and wreck houses and throw beer blasts for kicks, and 
            get editorials in the paper for being a public disgrace one day and an asset to society the 
            next. Greasers are almost like hoods; we steal things and drive old souped-up cars and 
            hold up gas stations and have a gang fight once in a while. I don't mean I do things like 
            that. Darry would kill me if I got into trouble with the police. Since Mom and Dad were 
            killed in an auto wreck, the three of us get to stay together only as long as we behave. So 
            Soda and I stay out of trouble as much as we can, and we're careful not to get caught 
            when we can't. I only mean that most greasers do things like that, just like we wear our 
            hair long and dress in blue jeans and T-shirts, or leave our shirttails out and wear leather 
            jackets and tennis shoes or boots. I'm not saying that either Socs orgreasers are better; 
            that's just the way things are. 
                 I could have waited to go to the movies until Darry or Sodapop got off work. 
            They would have gone with me, or driven me there, or walked along, although Soda just 
            can't sit still long enough to enjoy a movie and they bore Darry to death. Darry thinks his 
            life is enough without inspecting other people's. Or I could have gotten one of the gang to 
            come along, one of the four boys Darry and Soda and I have grown up with and consider 
            family. We're almost as close as brothers; when you grow up in a tight-knit neighborhood 
            like ours you get to know each other real well. If I had thought about it, I could have 
            called Darry and he would have come by on his way home and picked me up, or Two-Bit 
            Mathews--- one of our gang--- would have come to get me in his car if I had asked him, 
            but sometimes I just don't use my head. It drives my brother Darry nuts when I do stuff 
            like that, 'cause I'm supposed to be smart; I make good grades and have a high IQ and 
            everything, but I don't use my head. Besides, I like walking. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               4  	
                 I about decided I didn't like it so much, though, when I spotted that red Corvair 
            trailing me. I was almost two blocks from home then, so I started walking a little faster. I 
            had never been jumped, but I had seen Johnny after four Socs got hold of him, and it 
            wasn't pretty. Johnny was scared of his own shadow after that. Johnny was sixteen then. 
                 I knew it wasn't any use though--- the fast walking, I mean--- even before the 
            Corvair pulled up beside me and five Socs got out. I got pretty scared--- I'm kind of small 
            for fourteen even though I have a good build, and those guys were bigger than me. I 
            automatically hitched my thumbs in my jeans and slouched, wondering if I could get 
            away if I made a break for it. I remembered Johnny--- his face all cut up and bruised, and 
            I remembered how he had cried when we found him, half-conscious, in the comer lot. 
            Johnny had it awful rough at home--- it took a lot to make him cry. 
                 I was sweating something fierce, although I was cold. I could feel my palms 
            getting clammy and the perspiration running down my back. I get like that when I'm real 
            scared. I glanced around for a pop bottle or a stick or something--- Steve Randle, Soda's 
            best buddy, had once held off four guys with a busted pop bottle--- but there was nothing. 
            So I stood there like a bump on a log while they surrounded me. I don't use my head. 
            They walked around slowly, silently, smiling. 
                 "Hey, grease," one said in an over-friendly voice. "We're gonna do you a favor, 
            greaser. We're gonna cut all that long greasy hair off." 
                 He had on a madras shirt. I can still see it. Blue madras. One of them laughed, 
            then cussed me out in a low voice. I couldn't think of anything to say. There just isn't a 
            whole lot you can say while waiting to get mugged, so I kept my mouth shut. 
                 "Need a haircut, greaser?" The medium-sized blond pulled a knife out of his back 
            pocket and flipped the blade open. 
                 I finally thought of something to say. "No." I was backing up, away from that 
            knife. Of course I backed right into one of them. They had me down in a second. They 
            had my arms and legs pinned down and one of them was sitting on my chest with his 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               5  	
            knees on my elbows, and if you don't think that hurts, you're crazy. I could smell English 
            Leather shaving lotion and stale tobacco, and I wondered foolishly if I would suffocate 
            before they did anything. I was scared so bad I was wishing I would. I fought to get 
            loose, and almost did for a second; then they tightened up on me and the one on my chest 
            slugged me a couple of times. So I lay still, swearing at them between gasps. A blade was 
            held against my throat. 
                 "How'd you like that haircut to begin just below the chin?" 
                 It occurred to me then that they could kill me. I went wild. I started screaming for 
            Soda, Darry, anyone. Someone put his hand over my mouth, and I bit it as hard as I 
            could, tasting the blood running through my teeth. I heard a muttered curse and got 
            slugged again, and they were stuffing a handkerchief in my mouth. One of them kept 
            saying, "Shut him up, for Pete's sake, shut him up!" 
                 Then there were shouts and the pounding of feet, and the Socs jumped up and left 
            me lying there, gasping. I lay there and wondered what in the world was happening--- 
            people were jumping over me and running by me and I was too dazed to figure it out. 
            Then someone had me under the armpits and was hauling me to my feet. It was Darry. 
                 "Are you all right, Ponyboy?" 
                 He was shaking me and I wished he'd stop. I was dizzy enough anyway. I could 
            tell it was Darry though--- partly because of the voice and partly because Darry's always 
            rough with me without meaning to be. 
                 "I'm okay. Quit shaking me, Darry, I'm okay." 
                 He stopped instantly. "I'm sorry." 
                 He wasn't really. Darry isn't ever sorry for anything he does. It seems funny to me 
            that he should look just exactly like my father and act exactly the opposite from him. My 
            father was only forty when he died and he looked twenty-five and a lot of people thought 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               6  	
            Darry and Dad were brothers instead of father and son. But they only looked alike--- my 
            father was never rough with anyone without meaning to be. 
                 Darry is six-feet-two, and broad-shouldered and muscular. He has dark-brown 
            hair that kicks out in front and a slight cowlick in the back--- just like Dad's--- but Darry's 
            eyes are his own. He's got eyes that are like two pieces of pale blue-green ice. They've 
            got a determined set to them, like the rest of him. He looks older than twenty--- tough, 
            cool, and smart. He would be real handsome if his eyes weren't so cold. He doesn't 
            understand anything that is not plain hard fact. But he uses his head. 
                 I sat down again, rubbing my cheek where I'd been slugged the most. 
                 Darry jammed his fists in his pockets. "They didn't hurt you too bad, did they?" 
                 They did. I was smarting and aching and my chest was sore and I was so nervous 
            my hands were shaking and I wanted to start bawling, but you just don't say that to Darry. 
                 "I'm okay." 
                 Sodapop came loping back. By then I had figured that all the noise I had heard 
            was the gang coming to rescue me. He dropped down beside me, examining my head. 
                 "You got cut up a little, huh, Ponyboy?" 
                 I only looked at him blankly. "I did?" 
                 He pulled out a handkerchief, wet the end of it with his tongue, and pressed it 
            gently against the side of my head. "You're bleedin' like a stuck pig." 
                 "I am?" 
                 "Look!" He showed me the handkerchief, reddened as if by magic. "Did they pull 
            a blade on you?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               7  	
                 I remembered the voice: "Need a haircut, greaser?" The blade must have slipped 
            while he was trying to shut me up. "Yeah." 
                 Soda is handsomer than anyone else I know. Not like Darry--- Soda's movie-star 
            kind of handsome, the kind that people stop on the street to watch go by. He's not as tall 
            as Darry, and he's a little slimmer, but he has a finely drawn, sensitive face that somehow 
            manages to be reckless and thoughtful at the same time. He's got dark-gold hair that he 
            combs back--- long and silky and straight--- and in the summer the sun bleaches it to a 
            shining wheat gold. His eyes are dark brown--- lively, dancing, recklessly laughing eyes 
            that can be gentle and sympathetic one moment and blazing with anger the next. He has 
            Dad's eyes, but Soda is one of a kind. He can get drunk in a drag race or dancing without 
            ever getting near alcohol. In our neighborhood it's rare to find a kid who doesn't drink 
            once in a while. But Soda never touches a drop--- he doesn't need to. He gets drunk on 
            just plain living. And he understands everybody. 
                 He looked at me more closely. I looked away hurriedly, because, if you want to 
            know the truth, I was starting to bawl. I knew I was as white as I felt and I was shaking 
            like a leaf. 
                 Soda just put his hand on my shoulder. "Easy, Ponyboy. They ain't gonna hurt 
            you no more." 
                 "I know," I said, but the ground began to blur and I felt hot tears running down 
            my cheeks. I brushed them away impatiently. "I'm just a little spooked, that's all." I drew 
            a quivering breath and quit crying. You just don't cry in front of Darry. Not unless you're 
            hurt like Johnny had been that day we found him in the vacant lot. Compared to Johnny I 
            wasn't hurt at all. 
                 Soda rubbed my hair. "You're an okay kid, Pony." 
                 I had to grin at him--- Soda can make you grin no matter what. I guess it's because 
            he's always grinning so much himself. "You're crazy, Soda, out of your mind." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               8  	
                 Darry looked as if he'd like to knock our heads together. "You're both nuts." 
                 Soda merely cocked one eyebrow, a trick he'd picked up from Two-Bit. "It seems 
            to run in this family." 
                 Darry stared at him for a second, then cracked a grin. Sodapop isn't afraid of him 
            like everyone else and enjoys teasing him. I'd just as soon tease a full-grown grizzly; but 
            for some reason, Darry seems to like being teased by Soda. 
                 Our gang had chased the Socs to their car and heaved rocks at them. They came 
            running toward us now--- four lean, hard guys. They were all as tough as nails and looked 
            it. l had grown up with them, and they accepted me, even though I was younger, because 
            I was Darry and Soda's kid brother and I kept my mouth shut good. 
                 Steve Randle was seventeen, tall and lean, with thick greasy hair he kept combed 
            in complicated swirls. He was tacky, smart, and Soda's best buddy since grade school. 
            Steve's specialty was cars. He could lift a hubcap quicker and more quietly than anyone 
            in the neighborhood, but he also knew cars upside-down and backward, and he could 
            drive anything on wheels. He and Soda worked at the same gas station--- Steve part time 
            and Soda full time--- and their station got more customers than any other in town. 
            Whether that was because Steve was so good with cars or because Soda attracted girls 
            like honey draws flies, I couldn't tell you. I liked Steve only because he was Soda's best 
            friend. He didn't like me--- he thought I was a tag-along and a kid; Soda always took me 
            with them when they went places if they weren't taking girls, and that bugged Steve. It 
            wasn't my fault; Soda always asked me; I didn't ask him. Soda doesn't think I'm a kid. 
                 Two-Bit Mathews was the oldest of the gang and the wisecracker of the bunch. 
            He was about six feet tall, stocky in build, and very proud of his long rusty-colored 
            sideburns. He had gray eyes and a wide grin, and he couldn't stop making funny remarks 
            to save his life. You couldn't shut up that guy; he always had to get his two-bits worth in. 
            Hence his name. Even his teachers forgot his real name was Keith, and we hardly 
            remembered he had one. Life was one big joke to Two-Bit. He was famous for 
            shoplifting and his black-handled switchblade (which he couldn't have acquired without 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               9  	
            his first talent), and he was always smarting off to the cops. He really couldn't help it. 
            Everything he said was so irresistibly funny that he just had to let the police in on it to 
            brighten up their dull lives. (That's the way he explained it to me.) He liked fights, 
            blondes, and for some unfathomable reason, school. He was still a junior at eighteen and 
            a half and he never learned anything. He just went for kicks. I liked him real well because 
            he kept us laughing at ourselves as well as at other things. He reminded me of Will 
            Rogers--- maybe it was the grin. 
                 If I had to pick the real character of the gang, it would be Dallas Winston--- Dally. 
            I used to like to draw his picture when he was in a dangerous mood, for then I could get 
            his personality down in a few lines. He had an elfish face, with high cheekbones and a 
            pointed chin, small, sharp animal teeth, and ears like a lynx. His hair was almost white it 
            was so blond, and he didn't like haircuts, or hair oil either, so it fell over his forehead in 
            wisps and kicked out in the back in tufts and curled behind his ears and along the nape of 
            his neck. His eyes were blue, blazing ice, cold with a hatred of the whole world. Dally 
            had spent three years on the wild side of New York and had been arrested at the age of 
            ten. He was tougher than the rest of us--- tougher, colder, meaner. The shade of 
            difference that separates a greaser from a hood wasn't present in Dally. He was as wild as 
            the boys in the downtown outfits, like Tim Shepard's gang. 
                 In New York, Dally blew off steam in gang fights, but here, organized gangs are 
            rarities--- there are just small bunches of friends who stick together, and the warfare is 
            between the social classes. A rumble, when it's called, is usually born of a grudge fight, 
            and the opponents just happen to bring their friends along. Oh, there are a few named 
            gangs around, like the River Kings and the Tiber Street Tigers, but here in the Southwest 
            there's no gang rivalry. So Dally, even though he could get into a good fight sometimes, 
            had no specific thing to hate. No rival gang. Only Socs. And you can't win against them 
            no matter how hard you try, because they've got all the breaks and even whipping them 
            isn't going to change that fact. Maybe that was why Dallas was so bitter. 
                 He had quite a reputation. They have a file on him down at the police station. He 
            had been arrested, he got drunk, he rode in rodeos, lied, cheated, stole, rolled drunks, 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               10  	
            jumped small kids--- he did everything. I didn't like him, but he was smart and you had to 
            respect him. 
                 Johnny Cade was last and least. If you can picture a little dark puppy that has 
            been kicked too many times and is lost in a crowd of strangers, you'll have Johnny. He 
            was the youngest, next to me, smaller than the rest, with a slight build. He had big black 
            eyes in a dark tanned face; his hair was jet-black and heavily greased and combed to the 
            side, but it was so long that it fell in shaggy bangs across his forehead. He had a nervous, 
            suspicious look in his eyes, and that beating he got from the Socs didn't help matters. He 
            was the gang's pet, everyone's kid brother. His father was always beating him up, and his 
            mother ignored him, except when she was hacked off at something, and then you could 
            hear her yelling at him clear down at our house. I think he hated that worse than getting 
            whipped. He would have run away a million times if we hadn't been there. If it hadn't 
            been for the gang, Johnny would never have known what love and affection are. 
                 I wiped my eyes hurriedly. "Didya catch 'em?" 
                 "Nup. They got away this time, the dirty..." Two-Bit went on cheerfully, calling 
            the Socs every name he could think of or make up. 
                 "The kid's okay?" 
                 "I'm okay." I tried to think of something to say. I'm usually pretty quiet arotmd 
            people, even the gang. I changed the subject. "I didn't know you were out of the cooler 
            yet, Dally." 
                 "Good behavior. Got off early." Dallas lit a cigarette and handed it to Johnny. 
            Everyone sat down to have a smoke and relax. A smoke always lessens the tension. I had 
            quit trembling and my color was back. The cigarette was calming me down. Two-Bit 
            cocked an eyebrow. "Nice-lookin' bruise you got there, kid." 
                 I touched my cheek gingerly. "Really?" 
                 Two-Bit nodded sagely. "Nice cut, too. Makes you look tough." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               11  	
                 Tough and tuff are two different words. Tough is the same as rough; tuff means 
            cool, sharp--- like a tuff-looking Mustang or a tuff record. In our neighborhood both are 
            compliments. 
                 Steve flicked his ashes at me. "What were you doin', walkin' by your lonesome?" 
            Leave it to good old Steve to bring up something like that. 
                 "I was comin' home from the movies. I didn't think..." 
                 "You don't ever think," Darry broke in, "not at home or anywhere when it counts. 
            You must think at school, with all those good grades you bring home, and you've always 
            got your nose in a book, but do you ever use your head for common sense? No sirree, 
            bub. And if you did have to go by yourself, you should have carried a blade." 
                 I just stared at the hole in the toe of my tennis shoe. Me and Darry just didn't dig 
            each other. I never could please him. He would have hollered at me for carrying a blade if 
            I had carried one. If I brought home B's, he wanted A's, and if I got A's, he wanted to 
            make sure they stayed A's. If I was playing football, I should be in studying, and if I was 
            reading, I should be out playing football. He never hollered at Sodapop--- not even when 
            Soda dropped out of school or got tickets for speeding. He just hollered at me. 
                 Soda was glaring at him. "Leave my kid brother alone, you hear? It ain't his fault 
            he likes to go to the movies, and it ain't his fault the Socs like to jump us, and if he had 
            been carrying a blade it would have been a good excuse to cut him to ribbons." 
                 Soda always takes up for me. 
                 Darry said impatiently, "When I want my kid brother to tell me what to do with 
            my other kid brother, I'll ask you-- kid brother." But he laid off me. He always does when 
            Sodapop tells him to. Most of the time. 
                 "Next time get one of us to go with you, Ponyboy," Two-Bit said. "Any of us 
            will." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               12  	
                 "Speakin' of movies"--- Dally yawned, flipping away his cigarette butt--- "I'm 
            walkin' over to the Nightly Double tomorrow night. Anybody want to come and hunt 
            some action?" 
                 Steve shook his head. "Me and Soda are pickin' up Evie and Sandy for the game." 
                 He didn't need to look at me the way he did right then. I wasn't going to ask if I 
            could come. I'd never tell Soda, because he really likes Steve a lot, but sometimes I can't 
            stand Steve Randle. I mean it. Sometimes I hate him. 
                 Darry sighed, just like I knew he would. Darry never had time to do anything 
            anymore. "I'm working tomorrow night." 
                 Dally looked at the rest of us. "How about y'all? Two-Bit? Johnnycake, you and 
            Pony wanta come?" 
                 "Me and Johnny'll come," I said. I knew Johnny wouldn't open his mouth unless 
            he was forced to. "Okay, Darry?" 
                 "Yeah, since it ain't a school night." Darry was real good about letting me go 
            places on the weekends. On school nights I could hardly leave the house. 
                 "I was plannin' on getting boozed up tomorrow night," Two-Bit said. "If I don't, 
            I'll walk over and find y'all." 
                 Steve was looking at Dally's hand. His ring, which he had rolled a drunk senior to 
            get, was back on his finger. "You break up with Sylvia again?" 
                 "Yeah, and this time it's for good. That little broad was two-timin' me again while 
            I was in jail." 
                 I thought of Sylvia and Evie and Sandy and Two-Bit's many blondes. They were 
            the only kind of girls that would look at us, I thought. Tough, loud girls who wore too 
            much eye makeup and giggled and swore too much. I liked Soda's girl Sandy just fine, 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               13  	
            though. Her hair was natural blond and her laugh was soft, like her china-blue eyes. She 
            didn't have a real good home or anything and was our kind--- greaser--- but she was a real 
            nice girl. Still, lots of times I wondered what other girls were like. The girls who were 
            bright-eyed and had their dresses a decent length and acted as if they'd like to spit on us if 
            given a chance. Some were afraid of us, and remembering Dallas Winston, I didn't blame 
            them. But most looked at us like we were dirt--- gave us the same kind of look that the 
            Socs did when they came by in their Mustangs and Corvairs and yelled "Grease!" at us. I 
            wondered about them. The girls, I mean... Did they cry when their boys were arrested, 
            like Evie did when Steve got hauled in, or did they run out on them the way Sylvia did 
            Dallas? But maybe their boys didn't get arrested or beaten up or busted up in rodeos. 
                 I was still thinking about it while I was doing my homework that night. I had to 
            read Great Expectations for English, and that kid Pip, he reminded me of us--- the way he 
            felt marked lousy because he wasn't a gentleman or anything, and the way that girl kept 
            looking down on him. That happened to me once. One time in biology I had to dissect a 
            worm, and the razor wouldn't cut, so I used my switchblade. The minute I flicked it out--- 
            I forgot what I was doing or I would never have done it--- this girl right beside me kind 
            of gasped, and said, "They are right. You are a hood." That didn't make me feel so hot. 
            These were a lot of Socs in that class--- I get put into A classes because I'm supposed to 
            be smart--- and most of them thought it was pretty funny. I didn't, though. She was a cute 
            girl. She looked real good in yellow. 
                 We deserve a lot of our trouble, I thought. Dallas deserves everything he gets, and 
            should get worse, if you want the truth. And Two-Bit--- he doesn't really want or need 
            half the things he swipes from stores. He just thinks it's fun to swipe everything that isn't 
            nailed down. I can understand why Sodapop and Steve get into drag races and fights so 
            much, though--- both of them have too much energy, too much feeling, with no way to 
            blow it off. 
                 "Rub harder, Soda," I heard Darry mumbling. "You're gonna put me to sleep." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               14  	
                 I looked through the door. Sodapop was giving Darry a back-rub. Darry is always 
            pulling muscles; he roofs houses and he's always trying to carry two bundles of roofing 
            up the ladder. I knew Soda would put him to sleep, because Soda can put about anyone 
            out when he sets his head to it. He thought Darry worked too hard anyway. I did, too. 
                 Darry didn't deserve to work like an old man when he was only twenty. He had 
            been a real popular guy in school; he was captain of the football team and he had been 
            voted Boy of the Year. But we just didn't have the money for him to go to college, even 
            with the athletic scholarship he won. And now he didn't have time between jobs to even 
            think about college. So he never went anywhere and never did anything anymore, except 
            work out at gyms and go skiing with some old friends of his sometimes. 
                 I rubbed my cheek where it had turned purple. I had looked in the mirror, and it 
            did make me look tough. But Darry had made me put a Band-Aid on the cut. 
                 I remembered how awful Johnny had looked when he got beaten up. I had just as 
            much right to use the streets as the Socs did, and Johnny had never hurt them. Why did 
            the Socs hate us so much? We left them alone. I nearly went to sleep over my homework 
            trying to figure it out. 
                 Sodapop, who had jumped into bed by this time, yelled sleepily for me to turn off 
            the light and get to bed. When I finished the chapter I was on, I did. 
                 Lying beside Soda, staring at the wall, I kept remembering the faces of the Socs 
            as they surrounded me, that blue madras shirt the blond was wearing, and I could still 
            hear a thick voice: "Need a haircut, greaser?" I shivered. 
                 "You cold, Ponyboy?" 
                 "A little;" I lied. Soda threw one arm across my neck. He mumbled something 
            drowsily. "Listen, kiddo, when Darry hollers at you... he don't mean nothin'. He's just got 
            more worries than somebody his age ought to. Don't take him serious... you dig, Pony? 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               15  	
            Don't let him bug you. He's really proud of you 'cause you're so brainy. It's just because 
            you're the baby--- I mean, he loves you a lot. Savvy?" 
                 "Sure," I said, trying for Soda's sake to keep the sarcasm out of my voice. 
                 "Soda?" 
                 "Yeah?" 
                 "How come you dropped out?" I never have gotten over that. I could hardly stand 
            it when he left school. 
                 " 'Cause I'm dumb. The only things I was passing anyway were auto mechanics 
            and gym." 
                 "You're not dumb." 
                 "Yeah, I am. Shut up and I'll tell you something. Don't tell Darry, though." 
                 "Okay." 
                 "I think I'm gonna marry Sandy. After she gets out of school and I get a better job 
            and everything. I might wait till you get out of school, though. So I can still help Darry 
            with the bills and stuff." 
                 "Tuff enough. Wait till I get out, though, so you can keep Darry off my back." 
                 "Don't be like that, kid. I told you he don't mean half of what he says..." 
                 "You in love with Sandy? What's it like?" 
                 "Hhhmmm." He sighed happily. "It's real nice." 
                 In a moment his breathing was light and regular. I turned my head to look at him 
            and in the moonlight he looked like some Greek god come to earth. I wondered how he 
            could stand being so handsome. Then I sighed. I didn't quite get what he meant about 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               16  	
            Darry. Darry thought I was just another mouth to feed and somebody to holler at. Darry 
            love me? I thought of those hard, pale eyes. Soda was wrong for once, I thought. Darry 
            doesn't love anyone or anything, except maybe Soda. I didn't hardly think of him as being 
            human. I don't care, I lied to myself, I don't care about him either. Soda's enough, and I'd 
            have him until I got out of school. I don't care about Darry. But I was still lying and I 
            knew it. I lie to myself all the time. But I never believe me. 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               17  	
                                   Chapter 2 
                 DALLY WAS WAITING for Johnny and me under the street light at the corner 
            of Pickett and Sutton, and since we got there early, we had time to go over the drugstore 
            in the shopping center and goof around. We bought Cokes and blew the straws at the 
            waitress, and walked around eyeing things that were lying out in the open until the 
            manager got wise to us and suggested we leave. He was too late, though; Dally walked 
            out with two packages of Kools under his jacket. 
                 Then we went across the street and down Sutton a little way to The Dingo. There 
            are lots of drive-ins in town--- the Socs go to The Way Out and to Rusty's, and the 
            greasers go to The Dingo and to Jay's. The Dingo is a pretty rough hangout; there's 
            always a fight going on there and once a girl got shot. We walked around talking to all 
            the greasers and hoods we knew, leaning in car windows or hopping into the back seats, 
            and getting in on who was running away, and who was in jail, and who was going with 
            who, and who could whip who, and who stole what and when and why. We knew about 
            everybody there. There was a pretty good fight while we were there between a big 
            twenty-three-year-old greaser and a Mexican hitchhiker. We left when the switchblades 
            came out, because the cops would be coming soon and nobody in his right mind wants to 
            be around when the fuzz show. 
                 We crossed Sutton and cut around behind Spencer's Special, the discount house, 
            and chased two junior-high kids across a field for a few minutes; by then it was dark 
            enough to sneak in over the back fence of the Nightly Double drive-in movie. It was the 
            biggest in town, and showed two movies every night, and on weekends four--- you could 
            say you were going to the Nightly Double and have time to go all over town. 
                 We all had the money to get in--- it only costs a quarter if you're not in a car--- but 
            Dally hated to do things the legal way. He liked to show that he didn't care whether there 
            was a law or not. He went around trying to break laws. We went to the rows of seats in 
            front of the concession stand to sit down. Nobody else was there except two girls who 
            were sitting down front. Dally eyed them coolly, then walked down the aisle and sat right 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               18  	
            behind them. I had a sick feeling that Dally was up to his usual tricks, and I was right. He 
            started talking, loud enough for the two girls to hear. He started out bad and got worse. 
            Dallas could talk awful dirty if he wanted to and I guess he wanted to then. I felt my ears 
            get hot. Two-Bit or Steve or even Soda would have gone right along with him, just to see 
            if they could embarrass the girls, but that kind of kicks just doesn't appeal to me. I sat 
            there, struck dumb, and Johnny left hastily to get a Coke. 
                 I wouldn't have felt so embarrassed if they had been greasy girls--- I might even 
            have helped old Dallas. But those two girls weren't our kind. They were tuff-looking 
            girls--- dressed sharp and really good-looking. They looked about sixteen or seventeen. 
            One had short dark hair, and the other had long red hair. The redhead was getting mad, or 
            scared. She sat up straight and she was chewing hard on her gum. The other one 
            pretended not to hear Dally. Dally was getting impatient. He put his feet up on the back 
            of the redhead's chair, winked at me, and beat his own record for saying something dirty. 
            She turned around and gave him a cool stare. 
                 "Take your feet off my chair and shut your trap." 
                 Boy, she was good-looking. I'd seen her before; she was a cheerleader at our 
            school. I'd always thought she was stuck-up. 
                 Dally merely looked at her and kept his feet where they were. "Who's gonna make 
            me?" 
                 The other one fumed around and watched us. "That's the greaser that jockeys for 
            the Slash J sometime," she said, as if we couldn't hear her. 
                 I had heard the same tone a million times: "Greaser... greaser... greaser." Oh yeah, 
            I had heard that tone before too many times. What are they doing at a drive-in without a 
            car? I thought, and Dallas said, "I know you two. I've seen you around rodeos." 
                 "It's a shame you can't ride bull half as good as you can talk it," the redhead said 
            coolly and turned back around. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               19  	
                 That didn't bother Dally in the least. "You two barrel race, huh?" 
                 "You'd better leave us alone," the redhead said in a biting voice, "or I'll call the 
            cops." 
                 "Oh, my, my"--- Dally looked bored--- "you've got me scared to death. You ought 
            to see my record sometime, baby." He grinned slyly. "Guess what I've been in for?" 
                 "Please leave us alone," she said. "Why don't you be nice and leave us alone?" 
                 Dally grinned roguishly. "I'm never nice. Want a Coke?" 
                 She was mad by then. "I wouldn't drink it if I was starving in the desert. Get lost, 
            hood!" 
                 Dally merely shrugged and strolled off. 
                 The girl looked at me. I was half-scared of her. I'm half-scared of all nice girls, 
            especially Socs. "Are you going to start in on us?" 
                 I shook my head, wide-eyed. "No." 
                 Suddenly she smiled. Gosh, she was pretty. "You don't look the type. What's your 
            name?" 
                 I wished she hadn't asked me that. I hate to tell people my name for the first time. 
            "Ponyboy Curtis." 
                 Then I waited for the "You're kidding!" or "That's your real name?" or one of the 
            other remarks I usually get. Ponyboy's my real name and personally I like it. 
                 The redhead just smiled. "That's an original and lovely name." 
                 "My dad was an original person," I said. "I've got a brother named Sodapop, and 
            it says so on his birth certificate." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               20  	
                 "My name's Sherri, but I'm called Cherry because of my hair. Cherry Valance." 
                 "I know," I said. "You're a cheerleader. We go to the same school." 
                 "You don't look old enough to be going to high school," the dark-haired girl said. 
                 "I'm not. I got put up a year in grade school." 
                 Cherry was looking at me. "What's a nice, smart kid like you running around with 
            trash like that for?" 
                 I felt myself stiffen. "I'm a grease, same as Dally. He's my buddy." 
                 "I'm sorry, Ponyboy," she said softly. Then she said briskly, "Your brother 
            Sodapop, does he work at a gasoline station? A DX, I think?" 
                 "Yeah." 
                 "Man, your brother is one doll. I might have guessed you were brothers--- you 
            look alike." 
                 I grinned with pride--- I don't think I look one bit like Soda, but it's not every day 
            I hear Socs telling me they think my brother is a doll. 
                 "Didn't he used to ride in rodeos? Saddle bronc?" 
                 "Yeah. Dad made him quit after he tore a ligament, though. We still hang around 
            rodeos a lot. I've seen you two barrel race. You're good." 
                 "Thanks," Cherry said, and the other girl, who was named Marcia, said, "How 
            come we don't see your brother at school? He's not any older than sixteen or seventeen, is 
            he?" 
                 I winced inside. I've told you I can't stand it that Soda dropped out. "He's a 
            dropout," I said roughly. "Dropout" made me think of some poor dumb-looking hoodlum 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               21  	
            wandering the streets breaking out street lights--- it didn't fit my happy-go-lucky brother 
            at all. It fitted Dally perfectly, but you could hardly say it about Soda. 
                 Johnny came back then and sat down beside me. He looked around for Dally, then 
            managed a shy "Hi" to the girls and tried to watch the movie. He was nervous, though. 
            Johnny was always nervous around strangers. Cherry looked at him, sizing him up as she 
            had me. Then she smiled softly, and I knew she had him sized up right. 
                 Dally came striding back with an armful of Cokes. He handed one to each of the 
            girls and sat down beside Cherry. "This might cool you off." 
                 She gave him an incredulous look; and then she threw her Coke in his face. "That 
            might cool you off, greaser. After you wash your mouth and learn to talk and act decent, I 
            might cool off, too." 
                 Dally wiped the Coke off his face with his sleeve and smiled dangerously. If I had 
            been Cherry I would have beat it out of there. I knew that smile. 
                 "Fiery, huh? Well, that's the way I like 'em." He started to put his arm around her, 
            but Johnny reached over and stopped him. 
                 "Leave her alone, Dally." 
                 "Huh?" Dally was taken off guard. He stared at Johnny in disbelief. Johnny 
            couldn't say "Boo" to a goose. Johnny gulped and got a little pale, but he said, "You 
            heard me. Leave her alone." 
                 Dallas scowled for a second. If it had been me, or Two-Bit, or Soda or Steve, or 
            anyone but Johnny, Dally would have flattened him without a moment's hesitation. You 
            just didn't tell Dally Winston what to do. One time, in a dime store, a guy told him to 
            move over at the candy counter. Dally had turned around and belted him so hard it 
            knocked a tooth loose. A complete stranger, too. But Johnny was the gang's pet, and 
            Dally just couldn't hit him. He was Dally's pet, too. Dally got up and stalked off, his fists 
            jammed in his pockets and a frown on his face. He didn't come back. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               22  	
                 Cherry sighed in relief. "Thanks. He had me scared to death." 
                 Johnny managed an admiring grin. "You sure didn't show it. Nobody talks to 
            Dally like that." 
                 She smiled, "From what I saw, you do." 
                 Johnny's ears got red. I was still staring at him. It had taken more than nerve for 
            him to say what he'd said to Dally--- Johnny worshiped the ground Dallas walked on, and 
            I had never heard Johnny talk back to anyone, much less his hero. 
                 Marcia grinned at us. She was a little smaller than Cherry. She was cute, but that 
            Cherry Valance was a real looker. "Y'all sit up here with us. You can protect us." 
                 Johnny and I looked at each other. He grinned suddenly, raising his eyebrows so 
            that they disappeared under his bangs. Would we ever have something to tell the boys! 
            his eyes said plainly. We had picked up two girls, and classy ones at that. Not any greasy 
            broads for us, but real Socs. Soda would flip when I told him. 
                 "Okay," I said nonchalantly, "might as well." 
                 I sat between them, and Johnny sat next to Cherry. 
                 "How old are y'all?" Marcia asked. 
                 "Fourteen," I said. 
                 "Sixteen," said Johnny. 
                 'That's funny," Marcia said, "I thought you were both..." 
                 "Sixteen," Cherry finished for her. 
                 I was grateful. Johnny looked fourteen and he knew it and it bugged him 
            something awful. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               23  	
                 Johnny grinned. "How come y'all ain't scared of us like you were Dally?" 
                 Cherry sighed. "You two are too sweet to scare anyone. First of all, you didn't join 
            in Dallas's dirty talk, and you made him leave us alone. Aid when we asked you to sit up 
            here with us, you didn't act like it was an invitation to make out for the night. Besides 
            that, I've heard about Dallas Winston, and he looked as hard as nails and twice as tough. 
            And you two don't look mean." 
                 "Sure," I said tiredly, "we're young and innocent" 
                 "No," Cherry said slowly, looking at me carefully, "not innocent. You've seen too 
            much to be innocent. Just not... dirty." 
                 "Dally's okay," Johnny said defensively, and I nodded. You take up for your 
            buddies, no matter what they do. When you're a gang, you stick up for the members. If 
            you don't stickup for them, stick together, make like brothers, it isn't a gang any more. It's 
            a pack. A snarling, distrustful, bickering pack like the Socs in their social clubs or the 
            street gangs in New York or the wolves in the timber. "He's tough, but he's a cool old 
            guy." 
                 "He'd leave you alone if he knew you," I said, and that was true. When Steve's 
            cousin from Kansas came down, Dally was decent to her and watched his swearing. We 
            all did around nice girls who were the cousinly type. I don't know how to explain it--- we 
            try to be nice to the girls we see once in awhile, like cousins or the girls in class; but we 
            still watch a nice girl go by on a street corner and say all kinds of lousy stuff about her. 
            Don't ask me why. I don't know why. 
                 "Well," Marcia said with finality, "I'm glad he doesn't know us." 
                 "I kind of admire him," Cherry said softly, so only I heard, and then we settled 
            down to watch the movie. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               24  	
                 Oh, yeah, we found out why they were without a car. They'd come with their 
            boyfriends, but walked out on them when they found out the boys had brought some 
            booze along. The boys had gotten angry and left. 
                 "I don't care if they did." Cherry sounded annoyed. "It's not my idea of a good 
            time to sit in a drive-in and watch people get drunk." 
                 You could tell by the way she said it that her idea of a good time was probably, 
            high-class, and probably expensive. They'd decided to stay and see the movie anyway. It 
            was one of those beach-party movies with no plot and no acting but a lot of girls in 
            bikinis and some swinging songs, so it was all right. We were all four sitting there in 
            silence when suddenly a strong hand came down on Johnny's shoulder and another on 
            mine and a deep voice said, "Okay, greasers, you've had it" 
                 I almost jumped out of my skin. It was like having someone leap out from behind 
            a door and yell "Boo!" at you. 
                 I looked fearfully over my shoulder and there was Two-Bit, grinning like a 
            Chessy cat. "Glory, Two-Bit, scare us to death!" He was good at voice imitations and had 
            sounded for all the world like a snarling Soc. Then I looked at Johnny. His eyes were shut 
            and he was as white as a ghost. His breath was coming in smothered gasps. Two-Bit 
            knew better than to scare Johnny like that. I guess he'd forgotten. He's kind of 
            scatterbrained. Johnny opened his eyes and said weakly, "Hey, Two-Bit." 
                 Two-Bit messed up his hair, "Sorry, kid," he said, "I forgot." 
                 He climbed over the chair and plopped down beside Marcia. "Who's this, your 
            great-aunts?" 
                 "Great-grandmothers, twice removed," Cherry said smoothly. 
                 I couldn't tell if Two-Bit was drunk or not. It's kind of hard to tell with him--- he 
            acts boozed up sometimes even when he's sober. He cocked one eyebrow up and the 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               25  	
            other down, which he always does when something puzzles him, or bothers him, or when 
            he feels like saying something smart. "Shoot, you're ninety-six if you're a day." 
                 "I'm a night," Marcia said brightly. 
                 Two-Bit stared at her admiringly. "Brother, you're a sharp one. Where'd you two 
            ever get to be picked up by a couple of greasy hoods like Pony and Johnny?" 
                 "We really picked them up," Marcia said. "We're really Arabian slave traders and 
            we're thinking about shanghaiing them. They're worth ten camels apiece at least." 
                 "Five," Two-Bit disagreed. "They don't talk Arabian, I don't think. Say somethin' 
            in Arabian, Johnnycake." 
                 "Aw, cut it out!" Johnny broke in. "Dally was bothering them and when he left 
            they wanted us to sit with them to protect them. Against wisecracking greasers like you, 
            probably." 
                 Two-Bit grinned, because Johnny didn't usually get sassy like that. We thought 
            we were doing good if we could get him to talk at all. Incidentally, we don't mind being 
            called greaser by another greaser. It's kind of playful then. 
                 "Hey, where is of Dally, anyways?" 
                 "He went hunting some action--- booze or dames or a fight. I hope he don't get 
            jailed again. He just got out" 
                 "He'll probably find the fight," Two-Bit stated cheerfully. "That's why I came 
            over. Mr. Timothy Shepard and Co. are looking for whoever so kindly slashed their car's 
            tires, and since Mr. Curly Shepard spotted Dallas doing it... well... Does Dally have a 
            blade?" 
                 "Not that I know of," I said. "I think he's got a piece of pipe, but he busted his 
            blade this morning." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               26  	
                 "Good. Tim'll fight fair if Dally don't pull a blade on him. Dally shouldn't have 
            any trouble." 
                 Cherry and Marcia were staring at us. "You don't believe in playing rough or 
            anything, do you?" 
                 "A fair fight isn't rough;' Two-Bit said. "Blades are rough. So are chains and 
            heaters and pool sticks and rumbles. Skin fighting isn't rough. It blows off steam better 
            than anything. There's nothing wrong with throwing a few punches. Socs are rough. They 
            gang up on one or two, or they rumble each other with their social clubs. Us greasers 
            usually stick together, but when we do fight among ourselves, it's a fair fight between 
            two. And Dally deserves whatever he gets, 'cause slashed tires ain't no joke when you've 
            got to work to pay for them. He got spotted, too, and that was his fault. Our one rule, 
            besides Stick together, is Don't get caught. He might get beat up, he might not. Either 
            way there's not going to be any blood feud between our outfit and Shepard's, If we 
            needed them tomorrow they'd show. If Tim beats Dally's head in, and then tomorrow asks 
            us for help in a rumble, we'll show. Dally was getting kicks. He got caught. He pays up. 
            No sweat." 
                 "Yeah, boy," Cherry said sarcastically, "real simple." 
                 "Sure," Marcia said, unconcerned. "If he gets killed or something, you just bury 
            him. No sweat" 
                 "You dig okay, baby." Two-Bit grinned and lit a cigarette. "Anyone want a 
            weed?" 
                 I looked at Two-Bit admiringly. He sure put things into words good. Maybe he 
            was still a junior at eighteen and a half, and maybe his sideburns were too long, and 
            maybe he did get boozed up too much, but he sure understood things. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               27  	
                 Cherry and Marcia shook their heads at his offering of cigarettes, but Johnny and 
            I reached for one. Johnny's color was back and his breathing was regular, but his hand 
            was shaking ever so slightly. A cigarette would steady it. 
                 "Ponyboy, will you come with me to get some popcorn?" Cherry asked. 
                 I jumped up. "Sure. Y'all want some?" 
                 "I do," said Marcia. She was finishing the Coke Dally had given her. I realized 
            then that Marcia and Cherry weren't alike. Cherry had said she wouldn't drink Dally's 
            Coke if she was starving, and she meant it. It was the principle of the thing. But Marcia 
            saw no reason to throw away a perfectly good, free Coke. 
                 "Me too," said Two-Bit. He flipped me a fifty cent piece. "Get Johnny some, too. 
            I'm buyin'," he added as Johnny started to reach into his jeans pocket. 
                 We went to the concession stand and, as usual, there was a line a mile long, so we 
            had to wait. Quite a few kids turned to look at us--- you didn't see a kid grease and a Socy 
            cheerleader together often. Cherry didn't seem to notice. 
                 "Your friend--- the one with the sideburns--- he's okay?" 
                 "He ain't dangerous like Dallas if that's what you mean. He's okay." 
                 She smiled and her eyes showed that her mind was on something else. "Johnny... 
            he's been hurt bad sometime, hasn't he?" It was more of a statement than a question. 
            "Hurt and scared." 
                 "It was the Socs," I said nervously, because there were plenty of Socs milling 
            around and some of them were giving me funny looks, as if I shouldn't be with Cherry or 
            something. And I don't like to talk about it either--- Johnny getting beat up, I mean. But I 
            started in, talking a little faster than I usually do because I don't like to think about it 
            either. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               28  	
                  IT WAS ALMOST four months ago. I had walked down to the DX station to get 
            a bottle of pop and to see Steve and Soda, because they'll always buy me a couple of 
            bottles and let me help work on the cars. I don't like to go on weekends because then 
            there is usually a bunch of girls down there flirting with Soda--- all kinds of girls, Socs 
            too. I don't care too much for girls yet. Soda says I'll grow out of it. He did. 
                 It was a warmish spring day with the sun shining bright, but it was getting chilly 
            and dark by the time we started for home. We were walking because we had left Steve's 
            car at the station. At the corner of our block there's a wide, open field where we play 
            football and hang out, and it's often a site for rumbles and fist fights. We were passing it, 
            kicking rocks down the street and finishing our last bottle of Pepsi, when Steve noticed 
            something lying on the ground. He picked it up. It was Johnny's blue-jeans jacket--- the 
            only jacket he had. 
                 "Looks like Johnny forgot his jacket," Steve said, slinging it over his shoulder to 
            take it by Johnny's house. Suddenly he stopped and examined it more carefully. There 
            was a stain the color of rust across the collar. He looked at the ground. There were some 
            more stains on the grass. He looked up and across the field with a stricken expression on 
            his face. I think we all heard the low moan and saw the dark motionless hump on the 
            other side of the lot at the same time. Soda reached him first. Johnny was lying face down 
            on the ground. Soda turned him over gently, and I nearly got sick. Someone had beaten 
            him badly. 
                 We were used to seeing Johnny banged up--- his father clobbered him around a 
            lot, and although it made us madder than heck, we couldn't do anything about it. But 
            those beatings had been nothing like this. Johnny's face was cut up and bruised and 
            swollen, and there was a wide gash from his temple to his cheekbone. He would carry 
            that scar all his life. His white T-shirt was splattered with blood. I just stood there, 
            trembling with sudden cold. I thought he might be dead; surely nobody could be beaten 
            like that and live. Steve closed his eyes for a second and muffled a groan as he dropped 
            on his knees beside Soda. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               29  	
                 Somehow the gang sensed what had happened. Two-Bit was suddenly there 
            beside me, and for once his comical grin was gone and his dancing gray eyes were 
            stormy. Darry had seen us from our porch and ran toward us, suddenly skidding to a halt. 
            Dally was there, too, swearing under his breath, and turning away with a sick expression 
            on his face. I wondered about it vaguely. Dally had seen people killed on the streets of 
            New York's West Side. Why did he look sick now? 
                 "Johnny?" Soda lifted him up and held him against his shoulder. He gave the limp 
            body a slight shake. "Hey, Johnnycake." 
                 Johnny didn't open his eyes, but there came a soft question. "Soda?" 
                 "Yeah, it's me," Sodapop said. "Don't talk. You're gonna be okay." 
                 "There was a whole bunch of them," Johnny went on, swallowing, ignoring 
            Soda's command. "A blue Mustang full... I got so scared..." He tried to swear, but 
            suddenly started crying, fighting to control himself, then sobbing all the more because he 
            couldn't. I had seen Johnny take a whipping with a two-by-four from his old man and 
            never let out a whimper. That made it worse to see him break now. Soda just held him 
            and pushed Johnny's hair back out of his eyes. "It's okay, Johnnycake, they're gone now. 
            It's okay." 
                 Finally, between sobs, Johnny managed to gasp out his story. He had been 
            hunting our football to practice a few kicks when a blue Mustang had pulled up beside 
            the lot. There were four Socs in it. They had caught him and one of them had a lot of 
            rings on his hand--- that's what had cut Johnny up so badly. It wasn't just that they had 
            beaten him half to death--- he could take that. They had scared him. They had threatened 
            him with everything under the sun. Johnny was high-strung anyway, a nervous wreck 
            from getting belted every time he turned around and from hearing his parents fight all the 
            time. Living in those conditions might have turned someone else rebellious and bitter; it 
            was killing Johnny. He had never been a coward. He was a good man in a rumble. He 
            stuck up for the gang and kept his mouth shut good around cops. But after the night of the 
            beating, Johnny was jumpier than ever. I didn't think he'd ever get over it. Johnny never 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               30  	
            walked by himself after that. And Johnny, who was the most law-abiding of us, now 
            carried in his back pocket a six-inch switchblade. He'd use it, too, if he ever got jumped 
            again. They had scared him that much. He would kill the next person who jumped him. 
            Nobody was ever going to beat him like that again. Not over his dead body... 
                 I HAD NEARLY forgotten that Cherry was listening to me. But when I came 
            back to reality and looked at her, I was startled to find her as white as a sheet. 
                 "All Socs aren't like that," she said. "You have to believe me, Ponyboy. Not all of 
            us are like that." 
                 "Sure," I said. 
                 "That's like saying all you greasers are like Dallas Winston. I'll bet he's jumped a 
            few people." 
                 I digested that. It was true. Dally had jumped people. He had told us stories about 
            muggings in New York that made the hair on the back of my neck stand up. But not all of 
            us were that bad. 
                 Cherry no longer looked sick, only sad. "I'll bet you think the Socs have it made. 
            The rich kids, the West-side Socs. I'll tell you something, Ponyboy, and it may come as a 
            surprise. We have troubles you've never even heard of. You want to know something?" 
            She looked me straight in the eye. "Things are rough all over." 
                 "I believe you," I said. "We'd better get back out there with the popcorn or Two-
            Bit'll think I ran off with his money." 
                 We went back and watched the movie through again. Marcia and Two-Bit were 
            hitting it off fine. Both had the same scatterbrained sense of humor. But Cherry and 
            Johnny and I just sat there, looking at the movie and not talking. I quit worrying about 
            everything and thought about how nice it was to sit with a girl without having to listen to 
            her swear or to beat her off with a club. I knew Johnny liked it, too. He didn't talk to girls 
            much. Once, while Dallas was in reform school, Sylvia had started hanging on to Johnny 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               31  	
            and sweet talking him and Steve got hold of her and told her if she tried any of her tricks 
            with Johnny he'd personally beat the tar out of her. Then he gave Johnny a lecture on 
            girls and how a sneaking little broad like Sylvia would get him into a lot of trouble. As a 
            result, Johnny never spoke to girls much, but whether that was because he was scared of 
            Steve or because he was shy, I couldn't tell. 
                 I got the same lecture from Two-Bit after we'd picked up a couple of girls 
            downtown one day. I thought it was funny, because girls are one subject even Darry 
            thinks I use my head about. And it really had been funny, because Two-Bit was half 
            crocked when he gave me the lecture, and he told me some stories that about made me 
            want to crawl under the floor or something. But he had been talking about girls like 
            Sylvia and the girls he and Dally and the rest picked up at drive-ins and downtown; he 
            never said anything about Socy girls. So I figured it was all right to be sitting there with 
            them. Even if they did have their own troubles. I really couldn't see what Socs would 
            have to sweat about--- good grades, good cars, good girls, madras and Mustangs and 
            Corvairs--- Man, I thought, if I had worries like that I'd consider myself lucky. 
                 I know better now.  
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               32  	
                                   Chapter 3 
                 AFTER THE MOVIE was over it suddenly came to us that Cherry and Marcia 
            didn't have a way to get home. Two-Bit gallantly offered to walk them home--- the west 
            side of town was only about twenty miles away--- but they wanted to call their parents 
            and have them come and get them. Two-Bit finally talked them into letting us drive them 
            home in his car. I think they were still half-scared of us. They were getting over it, 
            though, as we walked to Two-Bit's house to pick up the car. It seemed funny to me that 
            Socs--- if these girls were any example--- were just like us. They liked the Beatles and 
            thought Elvis Presley was out, and we thought the Beatles were rank and that Elvis was 
            tuff, but that seemed the only difference to me. Of course greasy girls would have acted a 
            lot tougher, but there was a basic sameness. I thought maybe it was money that separated 
            us. 
                 "No," Cherry said slowly when I said this. "It's not just money. Part of it is, but 
            not all. You greasers have a different set of values. You're more emotional. We're 
            sophisticated--- cool to the point of not feeling anything. Nothing is real with us. You 
            know, sometimes I'll catch myself talking to a girl-friend, and realize I don't mean half of 
            what I'm saying. I don't really think a beer blast on the river bottom is super-cool, but I'll 
            rave about one to a girl-friend just to be saying something." She smiled at me. "I never 
            told anyone that. I think you're the first person I've ever really gotten through to." 
                 She was coming through to me all right, probably because I was a greaser, and 
            younger; she didn't have to keep her guard up with me. 
                 "Rat race is a perfect name for it," she said. "We're always going and going and 
            going, and never asking where. Did you ever hear of having more than you wanted? So 
            that you couldn't want anything else and then started looking for something else to want? 
            It seems like we're always searching for something to satisfy us, and never finding it. 
            Maybe if we could lose our cool. we could." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               33  	
                 That was the truth. Socs were always behind a wall of aloofness, careful not to let 
            their real selves show through. I had seen a social-club rumble once. The Socs even 
            fought coldly and practically and impersonally. 
                 "That's why we're separated," I said. "It's not money, it's feeling--- you don't feel 
            anything and we feel too violently." 
                 "And"--- she was trying to hide a smile--- "that's probably why we take turns 
            getting our names in the paper." 
                 Two-Bit and Marcia weren't even listening to us. They were engaged in some 
            wild conversation that made no sense to anyone but themselves. 
                 I have quite a rep for being quiet, almost as quiet as Johnny. Two-Bit always said 
            he wondered why Johnny and I were such good buddies. "You must make such interestin' 
            conversation," he'd say, cocking one eyebrow, "you keepin' your mouth shut and Johnny 
            not sayin' anything." But Johnny and I understood each other without saying anything. 
            Nobody but Soda could really get me talking. Till I met Cherry Valance. 
                 I don't know why I could talk to her; maybe for the same reason she could talk to 
            me. The first thing I knew I was telling her about Mickey Mouse, Soda's horse. I had 
            never told anyone about Soda's horse. It was personal. 
                 Soda had this buckskin horse, only it wasn't his. It belonged to a guy who kept it 
            at the stables where Soda used to work. Mickey Mouse was Soda's horse, though. The 
            first day Soda saw him he said, "There's my horse," and I never doubtedit. I was about ten 
            then. Sodapop is horsecrazy. I mean it. He's always hanging around stables and rodeos, 
            hopping on a horse every time he gets a chance. When I was ten I thought that Mickey 
            Mouse and Soda looked alike and were alike. Mickey Mouse was a dark-gold buckskin, 
            sassy and ornery, not much more than a colt. He'd come when Soda called him. He 
            wouldn't come for anyone else. That horse loved Soda. He'd stand there and chew on 
            Soda's sleeve or collar. Gosh, but Sodapop was crazy about that horse. He went down to 
            see him every day. Mickey Mouse was a mean horse: He kicked other horses and was 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               34  	
            always getting into trouble. "I've got me a ornery pony," Soda'd tell him, rubbing his 
            neck. "How come you're so mean, Mickey Mouse?" Mickey Mouse would just chew on 
            his sleeve and sometimes nip him. But not hard. He may have belonged to another guy, 
            but he was Soda's horse. 
                 "Does Soda still have him?" Cherry asked. 
                 "He got sold," I said. "They came and got him one day and took him off. He was a 
            real valuable horse. Pure quarter." 
                 She didn't say anything else and I was glad. I couldn't tell her that Soda had 
            bawled all night long after they came and got Mickey Mouse. I had cried, too, if you want 
            to know the truth, because Soda never really wanted anything except a horse, and he'd 
            lost his. Soda had been twelve then, going-on-thirteen. He never let on to Mom and Dad 
            how he felt, though, because we never had enough money and usually we had a hard time 
            making ends meet. When you're thirteen in our neighborhood you know the score. I kept 
            saving my money for a year, thinking that someday I could buy Mickey Mouse back for 
            Soda. You're not so smart at ten. 
                 "You read a lot, don't you, Ponyboy?" Cherry asked. 
                 I was startled. "Yeah. Why?" 
                 She kind of shrugged. "I could just tell. I'll bet you watch sunsets, too." She was 
            quiet for a minute after I nodded. "I used to watch them, too, before I got so busy..." 
                 I pictured that, or tried to. Maybe Cherry stood still and watched the sun set while 
            she was supposed to be taking the garbage out. Stood there and watched and forgot 
            everything else until her big brother screamed at her to hurry up. I shook my head. It 
            seemed funny to me that the sunset she saw from her patio and, the one I saw from the 
            back steps was the same one. Maybe the two different worlds we lived in weren't so 
            different. We saw the same sunset. 
                 Marcia suddenly gasped. "Cherry, look what's coming." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               35  	
                 We all looked and saw a blue Mustang coming down the street. Johnny made a 
            small noise in his throat and when I looked at him he was white. 
                 Marcia was shifting nervously. "What are we going to do?" 
                 Cherry bit a fingernail. "Stand here," she said. "There isn't much else we can do." 
                 "Who is it?" Two-Bit asked. "The F.B.I.?" 
                 "No," Cherry said bleakly, "it's Randy and Bob." 
                 "And," Two-Bit added grimly, "a few other of the socially elite checkered-shirt 
            set" 
                 "Your boyfriends?" Johnny's voice was steady, but standing as close to him as I 
            was, I could see he was trembling. I wondered why--- Johnny was a nervous wreck, but 
            he never was that jumpy. 
                 Cherry started walking down the street. "Maybe they won't see us. Act normal." 
                 "Who's acting?" Two-Bit grinned. "I'm a natural normal." 
                 "Wish it was the other way around," I muttered, and Two-Bit said, "Don't get 
            mouthy, Ponyboy" 
                 The Mustang passed us slowly and went right on by. Marcia sighed in relief. 'That 
            was close." 
                 Cherry turned to me. "Tell me about your oldest brother. You don't talk much 
            about him." 
                 I tried to think of something to say about Darry, and shrugged. "What's to talk 
            about? He's big and handsome and likes to play football." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               36  	
                 "I mean, what's he like? I feel like I know Soda from the way you talk about him; 
            tell me about Darry." And when I was silent she urged me on. "Is he wild and reckless 
            like Soda? Dreamy, like you?" My face got hot as I bit my lip. Darry... what was Darry 
            like? "He's..." I started to say he was a good ol' guy but I couldn't. I burst out bitterly: 
            "He's not like Sodapop at all and he sure ain't like me. He's hard as a rock and about as 
            human. He's got eyes exactly like frozen ice. He thinks I'm a pain in the neck. He likes 
            Soda--- everybody likes Soda--- but he can't stand me. I bet he wishes he could stick me 
            in a home somewhere, and he'd do it, too, if Soda'd let him." 
                 Two-Bit and Johnny were staring at me now. "No..." Two-Bit said, dumfounded. 
            "No, Ponyboy, that ain't right... you got it wrong..." 
                 "Gee," Johnny said softly, "I thought you and Darry and Soda got along real 
            well..." 
                 "Well, we don't," I snapped, feeling silly. I knew my ears were red by the way 
            they were burning, and I was thankful for the darkness. I felt stupid. Compared to 
            Johnny's home, mine was heaven. At least Darry didn't get drunk and beat me up or run 
            me out of the house, and I had Sodapop to talk things over with. That made me mad, I 
            mean making a fool of myself in front of everyone. "An' you can shut your trap, Johnny 
            Cade, 'cause we all know you ain't wanted at home, either. And you can't blame them." 
                 Johnny's eyes went round and he winced as though I'd belted him. Two-Bit 
            slapped me a good one across the side of the head, and hard. 
                 "Shut your mouth, kid. If you wasn't Soda's kid brother I'd beat the tar out of you. 
            You know better than to talk to Johnny like that." He put his hand on Johnny's shoulder. 
            "He didn't mean it, Johnny." 
                 "I'm sorry," I said miserably. Johnny was my buddy. "I was just mad." 
                 "It's the truth," Johnny said with a bleak grin. "I don't care." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               37  	
                 "Shut up talkin' like that," Two-Bit said fiercely, messing up Johnny's hair. "We 
            couldn't get along without you, so you can just shut up!" 
                 "It ain't fair!" I cried passionately. "It ain't fair that we have all the rough breaks!" 
            I didn't know exactly what I meant, but I was thinking about Johnny's father being a 
            drunk and his mother a selfish slob, and Two-Bit's mother being a barmaid to support 
            him and his kid sister after their father ran out on them, and Dally--- wild, cunning Dally-
            -- turning into a hoodlum because he'd die if he didn't, and Steve--- his hatred for his 
            father coming out in his soft, bitter voice and the violence of his temper. Sodapop... a 
            dropout so he could get a job and keep me in school, and Darry, getting old before his 
            time trying to run a family and hold on to two jobs and never having any fun--- while the 
            Socs had so much spare time and money that they jumped us and each other for kicks, 
            had beer blasts and river-bottom parties because they didn't know what else to do. Things 
            were rough all over, all right. All over the East Side. It just didn't seem right to me. 
                 "I know," Two-Bit said with a good-natured grin, "the chips are always down 
            when it's our turn, but that's the way things are. Like it or lump it." 
                 Cherry and Marcia didn't say anything. I guess they didn't know what to say. We 
            had forgotten they were there. Then the blue Mustang was coming down the street again, 
            more slowly. 
                 "Well," Cherry said resignedly, "they've spotted us." 
                 The Mustang came to a halt beside us, and the two boys in the front seat got out. 
            They were Socs all right. One had on a white shirt and a madras ski jacket, and the other 
            a light yellow shirt and a wine-colored sweater. I looked at their clothes and realized for 
            the first time that evening that all I had was a pair of jeans and Soda's old navy sweat 
            shirt with the sleeves cut short. I swallowed. Two-Bit started to tuck in his shirttail, but 
            stopped himself in time; he just flipped up the collar of his black leather jacket and lit a 
            cigarette. The Socs didn't even seem to see us. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               38  	
                 "Cherry, Marcia, listen to us..." the handsome black-haired Soc with the dark 
            sweater began. 
                 Johnny was breathing heavily and I noticed he was staring at the Soc's hand. He 
            was wearing three heavy rings. I looked quickly at Johnny, an idea dawning on me. I 
            remembered that it was a blue Mustang that had pulled up beside the vacant lot and that 
            Johnny's face had been cut up by someone wearing rings... 
                 The Soc's voice broke into my thoughts: "...just because we got a little drunk last 
            time..." 
                 Cherry looked mad. "A little? You call reeling and passing out in the streets 'a 
            little'? Bob, I told you, I'm never going out with you while you're drinking, and I mean it. 
            Too many things could happen while you're drunk. It's me or the booze." 
                 The other Soc, a tall guy with a semi-Beatle haircut, turned to Marcia. "Baby, you 
            know we don't get drunk very often..." When she only gave him a cold stare he got angry. 
            "And even if you are mad at us, that's no reason to go walking the streets with these 
            bums." 
                 Two-Bit took a long drag on his cigarette, Johnny slouched and hooked his 
            thumbs in his pockets, and I stiffened. We can look meaner than anything when we want 
            to--- looking tough comes in handy. Two-Bit put his elbow on Johnny's shoulder. "Who 
            you callin' bums?" 
                 "Listen, greasers, we got four more of us in the back seat..." 
                 "Then pity the back seat," Two-Bit said to the sky. 
                 "If you're looking for a fight..." 
                 Two-Bit cocked an eyebrow, but it only made him look more cool. "You mean if 
            I'm looking for a good jumping, you outnumber us, so you'll give it to us? Well..." He 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               39  	
            snatched up an empty bottle, busted off the end, and gave it to me, then reached in his 
            back pocket and flipped out his switchblade. "Try it, pal." 
                 "No!" Cherry cried. "Stop it!" She looked at Bob. "We'll ride home with you. Just 
            wait a minute." 
                 "Why?" Two-Bit demanded. "We ain't scared of them." 
                 Cherry shuddered. "I can't stand fights... I can't stand them..." 
                 I pulled her to one side. "I couldn't use this," I said, dropping the pop bottle. "I 
            couldn't ever cut anyone...." I had to tell her that, because I'd seen her eyes when Two-Bit 
            flicked out his switch. 
                 "I know," she said quietly, "but we'd better go with them. Ponyboy... I mean... if I 
            see you in the hall at school or someplace and don't say hi, well, it's not personal or 
            anything, but..." 
                 "I know," I said. 
                 "We couldn't let our parents see us with you all. You're a nice boy and 
            everything..." 
                 "It's okay," I said, wishing I was dead and buried somewhere. Or at least that I 
            had on a decent shirt. "We aren't in the same class. Just don't forget that some of us watch 
            the sunset too." 
                 She looked at me quickly. "I could fall in love with Dallas Winston," she said. "I 
            hope I never see him again, or I will." 
                 She left me standing there with my mouth dropped open, and the blue Mustang 
            vroomed off. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               40  	
                 We walked on home, mostly in silence. I wanted to ask Johnny if those were the 
            same Socs that had beaten him up, but I didn't mention it. Johnny never talked about it 
            and we never said anything. 
                 "Well, those were two good-lookin' girls if I ever saw any." Two-Bit yawned as 
            we sat down on the curb at the vacant lot. He took a piece of paper out,of his pocket and 
            tore it up. 
                 "What was that?" 
                 "Marcia's number. Probably a phony one, too. I must have been outa my mind to 
            ask for it. I think I'm a little soused." 
                 So he had been drinking. Two-Bit was smart. He knew the score. "Y'all goin' 
            home?" he asked. 
                 "Not right now," I said. I wanted to have another smoke and to watch the stars. I 
            had to be in by twelve, but I thought I had plenty of time. 
                 "I don't know why I handed you that busted bottle," Two-Bit said, getting to his 
            feet. "You'd never use it." 
                 "Maybe I would have," I said. "Where you headed?" 
                 "Gonna go play a little snooker and hunt up a poker game. Maybe get rip-roarin' 
            drunk. I dunno. See y'all tomorrow." 
                 Johnny and I stretched out on our backs and looked at the stars. I was freezing--- 
            it was a cold night and all I had was that sweat shirt, but I could watch stars in sub-zero 
            weather. I saw Johnny's cigarette glowing in the dark and wondered vaguely what it was 
            like inside a burning ember... 
                 "It was because we're greasers," Johnny said, and I knew he was talking about 
            Cherry. "We could have hurt her reputation." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               41  	
                 "I reckon," I said, wondering if I ought to tell Johnny what she had said about 
            Dallas. 
                 "Man, that was a tuff car. Mustangs are tuff." 
                 "Big time Socs, all right," I said, a nervous bitterness growing inside me. It wasn't 
            fair for the Socs to have everything. We were as good as they were; it wasn't our fault we 
            were greasers. I couldn't just take it or leave it, like Two-Bit, or ignore it and love life 
            anyway, like Sodapop, or harden myself beyond caring, like Dally, or actually enjoy it, 
            like Tim Shepard. I felt the tension growing inside of me and I knew something had to 
            happen or I would explode. 
                 "I can't take much more." Johnny spoke my own feelings. "I'll kill myself or 
            something." 
                 "Don't," I said, sitting up in alarm. "You can't kill yourself, Johnny." 
                 "Well, I won't. But I gotta do something. It seems like there's gotta be someplace 
            without greasers or Socs, with just people. Plain ordinary people." 
                 "Out of the big towns," I said, lying back down. "In the country..." 
                 In the country... I loved the country. I wanted to be out of towns and away from 
            excitement. I only wanted to lie on my back under a tree and read a book or draw a 
            picture, and not worry about being jumped or carrying a blade or ending up married to 
            some scatterbrained broad with no sense. The country would be like that, I thought 
            dreamily. I would have a yeller cur dog, like I used to, and Sodapop could get Mickey 
            Mouse back and ride in all the rodeos he wanted to, and Darry would lose that cold, hard 
            look and be like he used to be, eight months ago, before Mom and Dad were killed. Since 
            I was dreaming I brought Mom and Dad back to life... Mom could bake some more 
            chocolate cakes and Dad would drive the pickup out early to feed the cattle. He would 
            slap Darry on the back and tell him he was getting to be a man, a regular chip off the 
            block, and they would be as close as they used to be. Maybe Johnny could come and live 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               42  	
            with us, and the gang could come out on weekends, and maybe Dallas would see that 
            there was some good in the world after all, and Mom would talk to him and make him 
            grin in spite of himself. "You've got quite a mom," Dally used to say. "She knows the 
            score." She could talk to Dallas and kept him from getting into a lot of trouble. My 
            mother was golden and beautiful... 
                 "Ponyboy"--- Johnny was shaking me--- "Hey, Pony, wake up." 
                 I sat up, shivering. The stars had moved. "Glory, what time is it?" 
                 "I don't know. I went to sleep, too, listening to you rattle on and on. You'd better 
            get home. I think I'll stay all night out here." Johnny's parents didn't care if he came home 
            or not. 
                 "Okay." I yawned. Gosh, but it was cold. "If you get cold or something come on 
            over to our house." 
                 "Okay." 
                 I ran home, trembling at the thought of facing Darry. The porch light was on. 
            Maybe they were asleep and I could sneak in, I thought. I peeked in the window. 
            Sodapop was stretched out on the sofa, sound asleep, but Darry was in the armchair under 
            the lamp, reading the newspaper. I gulped, and opened the door softly. Darry looked up 
            from his paper. He was on his feet in a second. I stood there, chewing on my fingernail. 
                 "Where the heck have you been? Do you know what time it is?" He was madder 
            than I'd seen him in a long time. I shook my head wordlessly. 
                 "Well, it's two in the morning, kiddo. Another hour and I would have had the 
            police out after you. Where were you, Ponyboy?"--- his voice was rising--- "Where in the 
            almighty universe were you?" 
                 It sounded dumb, even to me, when I stammered, "I... I went to sleep in the lot..." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               43  	
                 "You what?" He was shouting, and Sodapop sat up and rubbed his eyes. 
                 "Hey, Ponyboy," he said sleepily, "where ya been?" 
                 "I didn't mean to." I pleaded with Darry. "I was talking to Johnny and we both 
            dropped off..." 
                 "I reckon it never occurred to you that your brothers might be worrying their 
            heads off and afraid to call the police because something like that could get you two 
            thrown in a boys' home so quick it'd make your head spin. And you were asleep in the 
            lot? Ponyboy, what on earth is the matter with you? Can't you use your head? You 
            haven't even got a coat on." 
                 I felt hot tears of anger and frustration rising. "I said I didn't mean to..." 
                 "I didn't mean to!" Darry shouted, and I almost shook. "I didn't think! I forgot! 
            That's all I hear out of you! Can't you think of anything?" 
                 "Darry..." Sodapop began, but Darry turned on him. "You keep your trap shut! I'm 
            sick and tired of hearin' you stick up for him." 
                 He should never yell at Soda. Nobody should ever holler at my brother. I 
            exploded. "You don't yell at him!" I shouted. Darry wheeled around and slapped me so 
            hard that it knocked me against the door. 
                 Suddenly it was deathly quiet. We had all frozen. Nobody in my family had ever 
            hit me. Nobody. Soda was wide-eyed. Darry looked at the palm of his hand where it had 
            turned red and then looked back at me. His eyes were huge. "Ponyboy..." 
                 I turned and ran out the door and down the street as fast as I could. Darry 
            screamed, "Pony, I didn't mean to!" but I was at the lot by then and pretended I couldn't 
            hear. I was running away. It was plain to me that Darry didn't want me around. And I 
            wouldn't stay if he did. He wasn't ever going to hit me again 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               44  	
                 "Johnny?" I called, and started when he rolled over and jumped up almost under 
            my feet. "Come on, Johnny, we're running away." 
                 Johnny asked no questions. We ran for several blocks until we were out of breath. 
            Then we walked. I was crying by then. I finally just sat down on the curb and cried, 
            burying my face in my arms. Johnny sat down beside me, one hand on my shoulder. 
            "Easy, Ponyboy," he said softly, "we'll be okay." 
                 I finally calmed down and wiped my eyes on my bare arm. My breath was coming 
            in quivering sobs. "Gotta cigarette?" 
                 He handed me one and struck a match. 
                 "Johnny, I'm scared." 
                 'Well, don't be. You're scarin' me. What happened? I never seen you bawl like 
            that." 
                 "I don't very often. It was Darry. He hit me. I don't know what happened, but I 
            couldn't take him hollering at me and hitting me too. I don't know... sometimes we get 
            along okay, then all of a sudden he blows up on me or else is naggin' at me all the time. 
            He didn't use to be like that... we used to get along okay... before Mom and Dad died. 
            Now he just can't stand me." 
                 "I think I like it better when the old man's hittin' me." Johnny sighed. "At least 
            then I know he knows who I am. I walk in that house, and nobody says anything. I walk 
            out, and nobody says anything. I stay away all night, and nobody notices. At least you got 
            Soda. I ain't got nobody." 
                 "Shoot," I said, startled out of my misery, "you got the whole gang. Dally didn't 
            slug you tonight 'cause you're the pet. I mean, golly, Johnny, you got the whole gang." 
                 "It ain't the same as having your own folks care about you," Johnny said simply. 
            "It just ain't the same." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               45  	
                 I was beginning to relax and wonder if running away was such a great idea. I was 
            sleepy and freezing to death and I wanted to be home in bed, safe and warm under the 
            covers with Soda's arm across me. I decided I would go home and just not speak to 
            Darry. It was my house as much as Darry's, and if he wanted to pretend I wasn't alive, 
            that was just fine with me. He couldn't stop me from living in my own house. 
                 "Let's walk to the park and back. Then maybe I'll be cooled off enough to go 
            home." 
                 "Okay," Johnny said easily. "Okay." 
                 Things gotta get better, I figured. They couldn't get worse. I was wrong. 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               46  	
                                   Chapter 4 
                 THE PARK WAS ABOUT two blocks square, with a fountain in the middle and a 
            small swimming pool for the little kids. The pool was empty now in the fall, but the 
            fountain was going merrily. Tall elm trees made the park shadowy and dark, and it would 
            have been a good hangout, but we preferred our vacant lot, and the Shepard outfit liked 
            the alleys down by the tracks, so the park was left to lovers and little kids. 
                 Nobody was around at two-thirty in the morning, and it was a good place to relax 
            and cool off. I couldn't have gotten much cooler without turning into a popsicle. Johnny 
            snapped up his jeans jacket and flipped up the collar. 
                 "Ain't you about to freeze to death, Pony?" 
                 "You ain't a'woofin'," I said, rubbing my bare arms between drags on my 
            cigarette. I started to say something about the film of ice developing on the outer edges of 
            the fountain when a sudden blast from a car horn made us both jump. The blue Mustang 
            was circling the park slowly. 
                 Johnny swore under his breath, and I muttered, "What do they want? This is our 
            territory. What are Socs doing this far east?" 
                 Johnny shook his head. "I don't know. But I bet they're looking for us. We picked 
            up their girls." 
                 "Oh, glory," I said with a groan, "this is all I need to top off a perfect night" I took 
            one last drag on my weed and ground the stub under my heel. "Want to run for it?" 
                 "It's too late now," Johnny said. "Here they come." 
                 Five Socs were coming straight at us, and from the way they were staggering I 
            figured they were reeling pickled. That scared me. A cool deadly bluff could sometimes 
            shake them off, but not if they outnumbered you five to two and were drunk. Johnny's 
            hand went to his back pocket and I remembered his switchblade. I wished for that broken 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               47  	
            bottle. I'd sure show them I could use it if I had to. Johnny was scared to death. I mean it. 
            He was as white as a ghost and his eyes were wild-looking, like the eyes of an animal in a 
            trap. We backed against the fountain and the Socs surrounded us. They smelled so 
            heavily of whiskey and English Leather that I almost choked. I wished desperately that 
            Darry and Soda would come along hunting for me. The four of us could handle them 
            easily. But no one was around, and I knew Johnny and I were going to have to fight it out 
            alone. Johnny had a blank, tough look on his face--- you'd have had to know him to see 
            the panic in his eyes. I stared at the Socs coolly. Maybe they could scare us to death, but 
            we'd never let them have the satisfaction of knowing it. 
                 It was Randy and Bob and three other Socs, and they recognized us. I knew 
            Johnny recognized them; he was watching the moonlight glint off Bob's rings with huge 
            eyes. 
                 "Hey, whatta ya know?" Bob said a little unsteadily, "here's the little greasers that 
            picked up our girls. Hey, greasers." 
                 "You're outa your territory," Johnny warned in a low voice. "You'd better watch 
            it" 
                 Randy swore at us and they stepped in closes. Bob was eyeing Johnny. "Nup, pal, 
            yer the ones who'd better watch it. Next time you want a broad, pick up yer own kind--- 
            dirt." 
                 I was getting mad. I was hating them enough to lose my head. 
                 "You know what a greaser is?" Bob asked. "White trash with long hair." 
                 I felt the blood draining from my face. I've been cussed out and sworn at, but 
            nothing ever hit me like that did. Johnnycake made a kind of gasp and his eyes were 
            smoldering. 
                 "You know what a Soc is?" I said, my voice shaking with rage. "White trash with 
            Mustangs and madras." And then, because I couldn't think of anything bad enough to call 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               48  	
            them, I spit at them. Bob shook his head, smiling slowly. "You could use a bath, greaser. 
            And a good working over. And we've got all night to do it. Give the kid a bath, David." 
                 I ducked and tried to run for it, but the Soc caught my arm and twisted it behind 
            my back, and shoved my face into the fountain. I fought, but the hand at the back of my 
            neck was strong and I had to hold my breath. I'm dying, I thought, and wondered what 
            was happening to Johnny. I couldn't hold my breath any longer. I fought again 
            desperately but only sucked in water. I'm drowning, I thought, they've gone too far... A 
            red haze filled my mind and I slowly relaxed. 
                 The next thing I knew I was lying on the pavement beside the fountain, coughing 
            water and gasping. I lay there weakly, breathing in air and spitting out water. The wind 
            blasted through my soaked sweat shirt and dripping hair. My teeth chattered unceasingly 
            and I couldn't stop them. I finally pushed myself up and leaned back against the fountain, 
            the water running down my face. Then I saw Johnny. 
                 He was sitting next to me, one elbow on his knee, and staring straight ahead. He 
            was a strange greenish-white, and his eyes were huger than I'd ever seen them. 
                 "I killed him," he said slowly. "I killed that boy." 
                 Bob, the handsome Soc, was lying there in the moonlight, doubled up and still. A 
            dark pool was growing from him, spreading slowly over the blue white cement. I looked 
            at Johnny's hand. He was clutching his switchblade, and it was dark to the hilt. My 
            stomach gave a violent jump and my blood turned icy. 
                 "Johnny," I managed to say, fighting the dizziness, "I think I'm gonna be sick." 
                 "Go ahead," he said in the same steady voice. "I won't look at you." 
                 I turned my head and was quietly sick for a minute. Then I leaned back and closed 
            my eyes so I wouldn't see Bob lying there. 
                 This can't be happening. This can't be happening. This can't be... 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               49  	
                 "You really killed him, huh, Johnny?" 
                 "Yeah." His voice quavered slightly. "I had to. They were drowning you, Pony. 
            They might have killed you. And they had a blade... they were gonna beat me up...." 
                 "Like..."--- I swallowed--- "like they did before?" 
                 Johnny was quiet for a minute. "Yeah," he said, "like they did before." 
                 Johnny told me what had happened: "They ran when I stabbed him. They all 
            ran..." 
                 A panic was rising in me as I listened to Johnny's quiet voice go on and on. 
            "Johnny!" I nearly screamed. "What are we gonna do? They put you in the electric chair 
            for, killing people!" I was shaking. I want a cigarette. I want a cigarette. I want a 
            cigarette. We had smoked our last pack. "I'm scared, Johnny. What are we gonna do?" 
                 Johnny jumped up and dragged me up by my sweat shirt. He shook me. "Calm 
            down, Ponyboy. Get ahold of yourself." 
                 I hadn't realized I was screaming. I shook loose. "Okay," I said, "I'm okay now." 
                 Johnny looked around, slapping his pockets nervously. "We gotta get outa here. 
            Get somewhere. Run away. The police'll be here soon." I was trembling, and it wasn't all 
            from cold. But Johnny, except for the fact that his hands were twitching, looked as cool 
            as Darry ever had. "We'll need money. And maybe a gun. And a plan." 
                 Money. Maybe a gun? A plan. Where in the world would we get these things? 
                 "Dally," Johnny said with finality. "Dally'll get us outs here." 
                 I heaved a sigh. Why hadn't I thought of that? But I never thought of anything. 
            Dallas Winston could do anything. 
                 "Where can we find him?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               50  	
                 "I think at Buck Merril's place. There's a party over there tonight. Dally said 
            somethin' about it this afternoon." 
                 Buck Merril was Dally's rodeo partner. He was the one who'd got Dally the iob as 
            a jockey for the Slash J. Buck raised a few quarter horses, and made most of his money 
            on fixed races and a little bootlegging. I was under strict orders from both Darry and 
            Soda not to get caught within ten miles of his place, which was dandy with me. I didn't 
            like Buck Merril. He was a tall lanky cowboy with blond hair and buckteeth. Or he used 
            to be bucktoothed before he had the front two knocked out in a fight. He was out of it. He 
            dug Hank Williams--- how gross can you get? 
                 Buck answered the door when we knocked, and a roar of cheap music came with 
            him. The clinking of glasses, loud, rough laughter and female giggles, and Hank 
            Williams. It scraped on my raw nerves like sandpaper. A can of beer in one hand, Buck 
            glared down at us. "Whatta ya want?" 
                 "Dally!" Johnny gulped, looking back over his shoulder. "We gotta see Dally." 
                 "He's busy," Buck snapped, and someone in his living room yelled "A-ha!" and 
            then "Yee-ha," and the sound of it almost made my nerves snap. 
                 "Tell him it's Pony and Johnny," I commanded. I knew Buck, and the only way 
            you could get anything from him was to bully him. I guess that's why Dallas could handle 
            him so easily, although Buck was in his mid-twenties and Dally was seventeen. "He'll 
            come." 
                 Buck glared at me for a second, then stumbled, off. He was pretty well crocked, 
            which made me apprehensive. If Dally was drunk and in a dangerous mood.... 
                 He appeared in a few minutes, clad only in a pair of low-cut blue jeans, scratching 
            the hair on his chest. He was sober enough, and that surprised me. Maybe he hadn't been 
            there long. 
                 "Okay, kids, whatta ya need me for?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               51  	
                 As Johnny told him the story, I studied Dally, trying to figure out what there was 
            about this tough-looking hood that a girl like Cherry Valance could love. Towheaded and 
            shifty-eyed, Dally was anything but handsome. Yet in his hard face there was character, 
            pride, and a savage defiance of the world. He could never love Cherry Valance back. It 
            would be a miracle if Dally loved anything. The fight for self-preservation had hardened 
            him beyond caring. 
                 He didn't bat an eye when Johnny told him what had happened, only grinned and 
            said "Good for you" when Johnny told how he had knifed the Soc. Finally Johnny 
            finished. "We figured you could get us out if anyone could. I'm sorry we got you away 
            from the party." 
                 "Oh, shoot, kid"--- Dally glanced contemptuously over his shoulder--- "I was in 
            the bedroom." 
                 He suddenly stared at me. "Glory, but your ears can get red, Ponyboy." 
                 I was remembering what usually went on in the bedrooms at Buck's parties. Then 
            Dally grinned in amused realization. "It wasn't anything like that, kid. I was asleep, or 
            tryin' to be, with all this racket. Hank Williams"--- he rolled his eyes and added a few 
            adjectives after 'Hank Williams.' "Me and Shepard had a run-in and I cracked some ribs. I 
            just needed a place to lay over." He rubbed his side ruefully. "Ol' Tim sure can pack a 
            punch. He won't be able to see outa one eye for a week." He looked us over and sighed. 
            "Well, wait a sec and I'll see what I can do about this mess." Then he took a good look at 
            me. "Ponyboy, are you wet?" 
                 "Y-y-yes-s," I stammered through chattering teeth. 
                 "Glory hallelujah!" He opened the screen door and pulled me in, motioning for 
            Johnny to follow. "You'll die of pneumonia 'fore the cops ever get you." 
                 He half-dragged me into an empty bedroom, swearing at me all the way. "Get that 
            sweat shirt off." He threw a towel at me. "Dry off and wait here. At least Johnny's got his 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               52  	
            jeans jacket. You ought to know better than to run away in just a sweat shirt, and a wet 
            one at that. Don't you ever use your head?" He sounded so much like Darry that I stared 
            at him. He didn't notice, and left us sitting on the bed. 
                 Johnny lay back on it. "Wish I had me a weed." 
                 My knees were shaking as I finished drying off, sitting there in my jeans. 
                 Dally appeared after a minute. He carefully shut the door. "Here"--- he handed us 
            a gun and a roll of bills--- "the gun's loaded. For Pete's sake, Johnny, don't point the thing 
            at me. Here's fifty bucks. That's all I could get out of Merril tonight He's blowin' his loot 
            from that last race." 
                 You might have thought it was Dally who fixed those races for Buck, being a 
            jockey and all, but it wasn't. The last guy to suggest it lost three teeth. It's the truth. Dally 
            rode the ponies honestly and did his best to win. It was the only thing Dally did honestly. 
                 "Pony, do Darry and Sodapop know about this?" 
                 I shook my head. Dally sighed. "Boy howdy, I ain't itchin' to be the one to tell 
            Darry and get my head busted." 
                 "Then don't tell him," I said. I hated to worry Sodapop, and would have liked to 
            let him know I had gotten this far okay, but I didn't care if Darry worried himself gray-
            headed. I was too tired to tell myself I was being mean and unreasonable. I convinced 
            myself it wouldn't be fair to make Dally tell him. Darry would beat him to death for 
            giving us the money and the gun and getting us out of town. 
                 "Here!" Dally handed me a shirt about sixty million sizes too big. "It's Buck's--- 
            you an' him ain't exactly the same size, but it's dry." He handed me his worn brown 
            leather jacket with the yellow sheep's-wool lining. "It'll get cold where you're going, but 
            you can't risk being loaded down with blankets." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               53  	
                 I started buttoning up the shirt. It about swallowed me. "Hop the three-fifteen 
            freight to Windrixville," Dally instructed. "There's an old abandoned church on top of Jay 
            Mountain. There's a pump in back so don't worry about water. Buy a week's supply of 
            food as soon as you get there--- this morning, before the story gets out, and then don't so 
            much as stick your noses out the door. I'll be up there as soon as I think it's clear. Man, I 
            thought New York was the only place I could get mixed up in a murder rap." 
                 At the word "murder," Johnny made a small noise in his throat and shuddered. 
                 Dally walked us back to the door, turning off the porch light before we stepped 
            out. "Git goin'!" He messed up Johnny's hair. "Take care, kid," he said softly. 
                 "Sure, Dally, thanks." And we ran into the darkness. 
                   
                   
                   
                 WE CROUCHED IN THE WEEDS beside the railroad tracks, listening to the 
            whistle grow louder. The train slowed to a screaming halt. "Now," whispered Johnny. We 
            ran and pulled ourselves into an open boxcar. We pressed against the side, trying to hold 
            our breath while we listened to the railroad workers walk up and down outside. One 
            poked his head inside, and we froze. But he didn't see us, and the boxcar rattled as the 
            train started up. 
                 "The first stop'll be Windrixville," Johnny said, laying the gun down gingerly. He 
            shook his head. "I don't see why he gave me this. I couldn't shoot anybody." 
                 Then for the first time, really, I realized what we were in for. Johnny had killed 
            someone. Quiet, soft-spoken little Johnny, who wouldn't hurt a living thing on purpose, 
            had taken a human life. We were really running away, with the police after us for murder 
            and a loaded gun by our side. I wished we'd asked Dally for a pack of cigarettes.... 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               54  	
                 I stretched out and used Johnny's legs for a pillow. Curling up, I was thankful for 
            Dally's jacket. It was too big, but it was warm. Not even the rattling of the train could 
            keep me awake, and I went to sleep in a hoodlum's jacket, with a gun lying next to my 
            hand. 
                 I WAS HARDLY AWAKE when Johnny and I leaped off the train into a 
            meadow. Not until I landed in the dew and got a wet shock did I realize what I was doing. 
            Johnny must have woke me up and told me to jump, but I didn't remember it. We lay in 
            the tall weeds and damp grass, breathing heavily. The dawn was coming. It was 
            lightening the sky in the east and a ray of gold touched the hills. The clouds were pink 
            and meadowlarks were singing. This is the country, I thought, half asleep. My dream's 
            come true and I'm in the country. 
                 "Blast it, Ponyboy"--- Johnny was rubbing his legs--- "you must have put my legs 
            to sleep. I can't even stand up. I barely got off that train." 
                 "I'm sorry. Why didn't you wake me up?" 
                 "That's okay. I didn't want to wake you up until I had to." 
                 "Now how do we find Jay Mountain?" I asked Johnny. I was still groggy with 
            sleep and wanted to sleep forever right there in the dew and the dawn. 
                 "Go ask someone. The story won't be in the paper yet. Make like a farm boy 
            taking a walk or something." 
                 "I don't look like a farm boy," I said. I suddenly thought of my long hair, combed 
            back, and the slouching stride I used from habit. I looked at Johnny. He didn't look like 
            any farm boy to me. He still reminded me of a lost puppy who had been kicked too often, 
            but for the first time I saw him as a stranger might see him. He looked hard and tough, 
            because of his black T-shirt and his blue jeans and jacket, and because his hair was 
            heavily greased and so long. I saw how his hair curled behind his ears and I thought: We 
            both need a haircut and some decent clothes. I looked down at my worn, faded blue jeans, 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               55  	
            my too-big shirt, and Dally's worn-out jacket. They'll know we're hoods the minute they 
            see us, I thought. 
                 "I'll have to stay here," Johnny said, rubbing his legs. "You go down the road and 
            ask the first person you see where Jay Mountain is." He winced at the pain in his legs. 
            "Then come back. And for Pete's sake, run a comb through your hair and quit slouching 
            down like a thug." 
                 So Johnny had noticed it too. I pulled a comb from my back pocket and combed 
            my hair carefully. "I guess I look okay now, huh, Johnny?" 
                 He was studying me. "You know, you look an awful lot like Sodapop, the way 
            you've got your hair and everything. I mean, except your eyes are green." 
                 "They ain't green, they're gray," I said, reddening. "And I look about as much like 
            Soda as you do." I got to my feet. "He's good-looking." 
                 "Shoot," Johnny said with a grin, "you are, too." 
                 I climbed over the barbed-wire fence without saying anything else. I could hear 
            Johnny laughing at me, but I didn't care. I went strolling down the red dirt road, hoping 
            my natural color would come back before I met anyone. I wonder what Darry and 
            Sodapop are doing now, I thought, yawning. Soda had the whole bed to himself for once. 
            I bet Darry's sorry he ever hit me. He'll really get worried when he finds out Johnny and I 
            killed that Soc. Then, for a moment, I pictured Sodapop's face when he heard about it. I 
            wish I was home, I thought absently, I wish I was home and still in bed. Maybe I am. 
            Maybe I'm just dreaming... 
                 It was only last night that Dally and I had sat down behind those girls at the 
            Nightly Double. Glory, I thought with a bewildering feeling of being rushed, things are 
            happening too quick. Too fast. I figured I couldn't get into any worse trouble than 
            murder. Johnny and I would be hiding for the rest of our lives. Nobody but Dally would 
            know where we were, and he couldn't tell anyone because he'd get jailed again for giving 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               56  	
            us that gun. If Johnny got caught, they'd give him the electric chair, and if they caught 
            me, I'd be sent to a reformatory. I'd heard about reformatories from Curly Shepard and I 
            didn't want to go to one at all., So we'd have to be hermits for the rest of our lives, and 
            never see anyone but Dally. Maybe I'd never see Darry or Sodapop again. Or even Two-
            Bit or Steve. I was in the country, but I knew I wasn't going to like it as much as I'd 
            thought I would. There are things worse than being a greaser. 
                 I met a sunburned farmer driving a tractor down the road. I waved at him and he 
            stopped. 
                 "Could you tell me where Jay Mountain is?" I asked as politely as I could. 
                 He pointed on down the road. "Follow this road to that big hill over there. That's 
            it. Taking a walk?" 
                 "Yessir." I managed to look sheepish. "We're playing army and I'm supposed to 
            report to headquarters there." 
                 I can lie so easily that it spooks me sometimes--- Soda says it comes from reading 
            so much. But then, Two-Bit lies all the time too, and he never opens a book. 
                 "Boys will be boys," the farmer said with a grin, and I thought dully that he 
            sounded as corn-poney as Hank Williams. He went on and I walked back to where 
            Johnny was waiting. 
                 WE CLIMBED UP THE ROAD to the church, although it was a lot farther away 
            than it looked. The road got steeper with every step. I was feeling kind of drunk--- I 
            always do when I get too sleepy--- and my legs got heavier and heavier. I guess Johnny 
            was sleepier than I was--- he had stayed awake on the train to make sure we got off at the 
            right place. It took us about forty-five minutes to get there. We climbed in a back 
            window. It was a small church, real old and spooky and spiderwebby. It gave me the 
            creeps. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               57  	
                 I'd been in church before. I used to go all the time, even after Mom and Dad were 
            gone. Then one Sunday I talked Soda into coming with Johnny and me. He didn't want to 
            come unless Steve did, and Two-Bit decided he might as well come too. Dally was 
            sleeping off a hangover, and Darry was working. When Johnny and I went, we sat in the 
            back, trying to get something out of the sermon and avoiding the people, because we 
            weren't dressed so sharp most of the time. Nobody seemed to mind, and Johnny and I 
            really liked to go. But that day... well, Soda can't sit still long enough to enjoy a movie, 
            much less a sermon. It wasn't long before he and Steve and Two-Bit were throwing paper 
            wads at each other and clowning around, and finally Steve dropped a hymn book with a 
            bang--- accidentally, of course. Everyone in the place turned around to look at us, and 
            Johnny and I nearly crawled under the pews. And then Two-Bit waved at them. 
                 I hadn't been to church since. 
                 But this church gave me a kind of creepy feeling. What do you call it? 
            Premonition? I flopped down on the floor--- and immediately decided not to do any more 
            flopping. That floor was stone, and hard. Johnny stretched out beside me, resting his head 
            on his arm. I started to say something to him, but I went to sleep before I could get the 
            words out of my mouth. But Johnny didn't notice. He was asleep, too. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               58  	
                                   Chapter 5 
                 I WOKE UP LATE IN the afternoon. For a second I didn't know where I was. 
            You know how it is, when you wake up in a strange place and wonder where in the world 
            you are, until memory comes rushing over you like a wave. I half convinced myself that I 
            had dreamed everything that had happened the night before. I'm really home in bed, I 
            thought. It's late and both Darry and Sodapop are up. Darry's cooking breakfast, and in a 
            minute he and Soda will come in and drag me out of bed and wrestle me down and tickle 
            me until I think I'll die if they don't stop. It's me and Soda's turn to do the dishes after we 
            eat, and then we'll all go outside and play football. Johnny and Two-Bit and I will get 
            Darry on our side, since Johnny and I are so small and Darry's the best player. It'll go like 
            the usual weekend morning. I tried telling myself that while I lay on the cold rock floor, 
            wrapped up in Dally's jacket and listening to the wind rushing through the trees' dry 
            leaves outside. 
                 Finally I quit pretending and pushed myself up. I was stiff and sore from sleeping 
            on that hard floor, but I had never slept so soundly. I was still groggy. I pushed off 
            Johnny's jeans jacket, which had somehow got thrown across me, and blinked, scratching 
            my head. It was awful quiet, with just the sound of rushing wind in the trees. Suddenly I 
            realized that Johnny wasn't there. 
                 "Johnny?" I called loudly, and that old wooden church echoed me, onny onny... I 
            looked around wildly, almost panic-stricken, but then caught sight of some crooked 
            lettering written in the dust of the floor. Went to get supplies. Be back soon. J.C. 
                 I sighed, and went to the pump to get a drink. The water from it was like liquid ice 
            and it tasted funny, but it was water. I splashed some on my face and that woke me up 
            pretty quick. I wiped my face off on Johnny's jacket and sat down on the back steps. The 
            hill the church was on dropped off suddenly about twenty feet from the back door, and 
            you could see for miles and miles. It was like sitting on the top of the world. 
                 When you haven't got anything to do, you remember things in spite of yourself. I 
            could remember every detail of the whole night, but it had the unreal quality of a dream. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               59  	
            It seemed much longer than twenty-four hours since Johnny and I had met Dally at the 
            corner of Pickett and Sutton. Maybe it was. Maybe Johnny had been gone a whole week 
            and I had just slept. Maybe he had already been worked over by the fuzz and was waiting 
            to get the electric chair since he wouldn't tell where I was. Maybe Dally had been killed 
            in a car wreck or something and no one would ever know where I was, and I'd just die up 
            here, alone, and turn into a skeleton. My over-active imagination was running away with 
            me again. Sweat ran down my face and back, and I was trembling. My head swam, and I 
            leaned back and closed my eyes. I guess it was partly delayed shock. Finally my stomach 
            calmed down and I relaxed a little, hoping that Johnny would remember cigarettes. I was 
            scared, sitting there by myself. 
                 I heard someone coming up through the dead leaves toward the back of the 
            church, and I ducked inside the door. Then I heard a whistle, long and low, ending in a 
            sudden high note. I knew that whistle well enough. It was used by us and the Shepard 
            gang for "Who's there?" I returned it carefully, then darted out the door so fast that I fell 
            off the steps and sprawled flat under Johnny's nose. 
                 I propped myself on my elbows and grinned up at him. "Hey, Johnny. Fancy 
            meetin' you here." 
                 He looked down at me over a big package. "I swear, Ponyboy, you're gettin' to act 
            more like Two-Bit every day." 
                 I tried unsuccessfully to cock an eyebrow. "Who's acting?" I rolled over and 
            sprang up, happy that someone was there. "What'd you get?" 
                 "Come on inside. Dally told us to stay inside." 
                 We went in. Johnny dusted off a table with his jacket and started taking things out 
            of the sack and lining them up neatly. "A week's supply of baloney, two loaves of bread, 
            a box of matches..." Johnny went on. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               60  	
                 I got tired of watching him do it all, so I started digging into the sack myself. 
            "Wheee!" I sat down on a dusty chair and stared. "A paperback copy of Gone with the 
            Wind! How'd you know I always wanted one?" 
                 Johnny reddened. "I remembered you sayin' something about it once. And me and 
            you went to see that movie, 'member? I thought you could maybe read it out loud and 
            help kill time or something." 
                 "Gee, thanks." I put the book down reluctantly. I wanted to start it right then. 
            "Peroxide? A deck of cards..." Suddenly I realized something. "Johnny, you ain't thinking 
            of..." 
                 Johnny sat down and pulled out his knife. "We're gonna cut our hair, and you're 
            gonna bleach yours." He looked at the ground carefully. "They'll have our descriptions in 
            the paper. We can't fit 'em." 
                 "Oh, no!" My hand flew to my hair. "No, Johnny, not my hair!" 
                 It was my pride. It was long and silky, just like Soda's, only a little redder. Our 
            hair was tuff--- we didn't have to use much grease on it. Our hair labeled us greasers, too-
            -- it was our trademark. The one thing we were proud of. Maybe we couldn't have 
            Corvairs or madras shirts, but we could have hair. 
                 "We'd have to anyway if we got caught. You know the first thing the judge does is 
            make you get a haircut" 
                 "I don't see why," I said sourly. "Dally could just as easily mug somebody with 
            short hair." 
                 "I don't know either--- it's just a way of trying to break us. They can't really do 
            anything to guys like Curly Shepard or Tim; they've had about everything done to them. 
            And they can't take anything away from them because they don't have anything in the 
            first place. So they cut their hair." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               61  	
                 I looked at Johnny imploringly. Johnny sighed. "I'm gonna cut mine too, and 
            wash the grease out, but I can't bleach it. I'm too dark-skinned to look okay blond. Oh, 
            come on, Ponyboy," he pleaded. "It'll grow back." 
                 "Okay," I said, wide-eyed. "Get it over with." 
                 Johnny flipped out the razor-edge of his switch, took hold of my hair, and started 
            sawing on it. I shuddered. "Not too short," I begged. "Johnny, please..." 
                 Finally it was over with. My hair looked funny, scattered over the floor in tufts. 
            "It's lighter than I thought it was," I said, examining it. "Can I see what I look like now?" 
                 "No," Johnny said slowly, staring at me. "We gotta bleach it first." 
                 After I'd sat in the sun for fifteen minutes to dry the bleach, Johnny let me look in 
            the old cracked mirror we'd found in a closet. I did a double take. My hair was even 
            lighter than Sodapop's. I'd never combed it to the side like that. It just didn't look like me. 
            It made me look younger, and scareder, too. Boy howdy, I thought, this really makes me 
            look tuff. I look like a blasted pansy. I was miserable. 
                 Johnny handed me the knife. He looked scared, too. "Cut the front and thin out 
            the rest. I'll comb it back after I wash it." 
                 "Johnny," I said tiredly, "you can't wash your hair in that freezing water in this 
            weather. You'll get a cold." 
                 He only shrugged. "Go ahead and cut it." 
                 I did the best I could. He went ahead and washed it anyway, using the bar of soap 
            he'd bought. I was glad I had had to run away with him instead of with Two-Bit or Steve 
            or Dally. That would be one thing they'd never think of soap. I gave him Dally's jacket to 
            wrap up in, and he sat shivering in the sunlight on the back steps, leaning against the 
            door, combing his hair back. It was the first time I could see that he had eyebrows. He 
            didn't look like Johnny. His forehead was whiter where his bangs had been; it would have 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               62  	
            been funny if we hadn't been so scared. He was still shivering with cold. "I guess," he 
            said weakly, "I guess we're disguised." 
                 I leaned back next to him sullenly. "I guess so." 
                 "Oh, shoot," Johnny said with fake cheerfulness, "it's just hair." 
                 "Shoot nothing," I snapped. "It took me a long time to get that hair just the way I 
            wanted it. And besides, this just ain't us. It's like being in a Halloween costume we can't 
            get out of." 
                 "Well, we got to get used to it," Johnny said with finality. "We're in big trouble 
            and it's our looks or us." 
                 I started eating a candy bar. "I'm still tired," I said. To my surprise, the ground 
            blurred and I felt tears running down my cheeks. I brushed them off hurriedly. Johnny 
            looked as miserable as I felt. 
                 "I'm sorry I cut your hair off, Ponyboy." 
                 "Oh, it ain't that;" I said between bites of chocolate. "I mean, not all of it. I'm just 
            a little spooky. I really don't know what's the matter. I'm just mixed up." 
                 "I know," Johnny said through chattering teeth as we went inside. "Things have 
            been happening so fast..." I put my arm across his shoulders to warm him up. 
                 "Two-Bit shoulda been in that little one-horse store. Man, we're in the middle of 
            nowhere; the nearest house is two miles away. Things were layin' out wide open, just 
            waitin' for somebody slick like Two-Bit to come and pick 'em up. He coulda walked out 
            with half the store." He leaned back beside me, and I could feel him trembling. "Good ol' 
            Two-Bit," he said in a quavering voice. He must have been as homesick as I was. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               63  	
                 "Remember how he was wisecrackin' last night?" I said. "Last night... just last 
            night we were walkin' Cherry and Marcia over to Two-Bit's. Just last night we were layin' 
            in the lot, lookin' up at the stars and dreaming..." 
                 "Stop it!" Johnny gasped from between clenched teeth. "Shut up about last night! 
            I killed a kid last night. He couldn't of been over seventeen or eighteen, and I killed him. 
            How'd you like to live with that?" He was crying. I held him like Soda had held him the 
            day we found him lying in the lot. 
                 "I didn't mean to," he finally blurted out, "but they were drownin' you, and I was 
            so scared..." He was quiet for a minute. "There sure is a lot of blood in people." 
                 He got up suddenly and began pacing back and forth, slapping his pockets. 
                 "Whatta we gonna do?" I was crying by then. It was getting dark and I was cold 
            and lonesome. I closed my eyes and leaned my head back, but the tears came anyway. 
                 "This is my fault," Johnny said in a miserable voice. He had stopped crying when 
            I started. "For bringin' a little thirteen-year-old kid along. You ought to go home. You 
            can't get into any trouble. You didn't kill him." 
                 "No!" I screamed at him. "I'm fourteen! I've been fourteen for a month! And I'm 
            in it as much as you are. I'll stop crying in a minute... I can't help it." 
                 He slumped down beside me. "I didn't mean it like that, Ponyboy. Don't cry, 
            Pony, we'll be okay. Don't cry..." I leaned against him and bawled until I went to sleep. 
                 I woke up late that night. Johnny was resting against the wall and I was asleep on 
            his shoulder. "Johnny?" I yawned. "You awake?" I was warm and sleepy. 
                 "Yeah," he said quietly. 
                 "We ain't gonna cry no more, are we?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               64  	
                 "Nope. We're all cried out now. We're gettin' used to the idea. We're gonna be 
            okay now." 
                 "That's what I thought," I said drowsily. Then for the first time since Dally and I 
            had sat down behind those girls at the Nightly Double, I relaxed. We could take whatever 
            was coming now. 
                 THE NEXT FOUR or five days were the longest days I've ever spent in my life. 
            We killed time by reading Gone with the Wind and playing poker. Johnny sure did like 
            that book, although he didn't know anything about the Civil War and even less about 
            plantations, and I had to explain a lot of it to him. It amazed me how Johnny could get 
            more meaning out of some of the stuff in there than I could--- I was supposed to be the 
            deep one. Johnny had failed a year in school and never made good grades--- he couldn't 
            grasp anything that was shoved at him too fast, and I guess his teachers thought he was 
            just plain dumb. But he wasn't. He was just a little slow to get things, and he liked to 
            explore things once he did get them. He was especially stuck on the Southern gentlemen-
            -- impressed with their manners and charm. 
                 "I bet they were cool ol' guys," he said, his eyes glowing, after I had read the part 
            about them riding into sure death because they were gallant. "They remind me of Dally." 
                 "Dally?" I said, startled. "Shoot, he ain't got any more manners than I do. And you 
            saw how he treated those girls the other night. Soda's more like them Southern boys." 
                 "Yeah... in the manners bit, and the charm, too, I guess," Johnny said slowly, "but 
            one night I saw Dally gettin' picked up by the fuzz, and he kept real cool and calm the 
            whole time. They was gettin' him for breakin' out the windows in the school building, and 
            it was Two-Bit who did that. And Dally knew it. But he just took the sentence without 
            battin' an eye or even denyin' it. That's gallant." 
                 That was the first time I realized the extent of Johnny's hero-worship for Dally 
            Winston. Of all of us, Dally was the one I liked least. He didn't have Soda's 
            understanding or dash, or Two-Bit's humor, or even Darry's superman qualities. But I 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               65  	
            realized that these three appealed to me because they were like the heroes in the novels I 
            read. Dally was real. I liked my books and clouds and sunsets. Dally was so real he 
            scared me. 
                 Johnny and I never went to the front of the church. You could see the front from 
            the road, and sometimes farm kids rode their horses by on their way to the store. So we 
            stayed in the very back, usually sitting on the steps and looking across the valley. We 
            could see for miles; see the ribbon of highway and the small dots that were houses and 
            cars. We couldn't watch the sunset, since the back faced east, but I loved to look at the 
            colors of the fields and the soft shadings of the horizon. 
                 One morning I woke up earlier than usual. Johnny and I slept huddled together for 
            warmth--- Dally had been right when he said it would get cold where we were going. 
            Being careful not to wake Johnny up, I went to sit on the steps and smoke a cigarette. The 
            dawn was coming then. All the lower valley was covered with mist, and sometimes little 
            pieces of it broke off and floated away in small clouds. The sky was lighter in the east, 
            and the horizon was a thin golden line. The clouds changed from gray to pink, and the 
            mist was touched with gold. There was a silent moment when everything held its breath, 
            and then the sun rose. It was beautiful. 
                 "Golly"--- Johnny's voice beside me made me jump--- "that sure was pretty." 
                 "Yeah." I sighed, wishing I had some paint to do a picture with while the sight 
            was still fresh in my mind. 
                 "The mist was what was pretty," Johnny said. "All gold and silver." 
                 "Uhmmmm," I said, trying to blow a smoke ring. 
                 "Too bad it couldn't stay like that all the time." 
                 "Nothing gold can stay." I was remembering a poem I'd read once. 
                 "What?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               66  	
                               "Nature's first green is gold, 
                                Her hardest hue to hold. 
                                Her early leaf’s a flower; 
                                 But only so an hour. 
                                Then leaf subsides to leaf. 
                                 So Eden sank to grief, 
                               So dawn goes down to day. 
                                Nothing gold can stay." 
                 Johnny was staring at me. "Where'd you learn that? That was what I meant" 
                 "Robert Frost wrote it. He meant more to it than I'm gettin' though." I was trying 
            to find the meaning the poet had in mind, but it eluded me. "I always remembered it 
            because I never quite got what he meant by it" 
                 "You know," Johnny said slowly, "I never noticed colors and clouds and stuff 
            until you kept reminding me about them. It seems like they were never there before." He 
            thought for a minute. "Your family sure is funny." 
                 "And what happens to be so funny about it?" I asked stiffly. 
                 Johnny looked at me quickly. "I didn't mean nothing. I meant, well, Soda kinda 
            looks like your mother did, but he acts just exactly like your father. And Darry is the 
            spittin' image of your father, but he ain't wild and laughing all the time like he was. He 
            acts like your mother. And you don't act like either one." 
                 "I know," I said. "Well," I said, thinking this over, "you ain't like any of the gang. 
            I mean, I couldn't tell Two-Bit or Steve or even Darry about the sunrise and clouds and 
            stuff. I couldn't even remember that poem around them. I mean, they just don't dig. Just 
            you and Sodapop. And maybe Cherry Valance." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               67  	
                 Johnny shrugged. "Yeah," he said with a sigh. "I guess we're different." 
                 "Shoot," I said, blowing a perfect smoke ring, "maybe they are." 
                 By the fifth day I was so tired of baloney I nearly got sick every time I looked at 
            it. We had eaten all our candy bars in the first two days. I was dying for a Pepsi. I'm what 
            you might call a Pepsi addict. I drink them like a fiend, and going for five days without 
            one was about to kill me. Johnny promised to get some if we ran out of supplies and had 
            to get some more, but that didn't help me right then. I was smoking a lot more there than I 
            usually did--- I guess because it was something to do--- although Johnny warned me that 
            I would get sick smoking so much. We were careful with our cigarettes--- if that old 
            church ever caught fire there'd be no stopping it. 
                 On the fifth day I had read up to Sherman's siege of Atlanta in Gone with the 
            Wind, owed Johnny a hundred and fifty bucks from poker games, smoked two packs of 
            Camels, and as Johnny had predicted, got sick. I hadn't eaten anything all day; and 
            smoking on an empty stomach doesn't make you feel real great. I curled up in a corner to 
            sleep off the smoke. I was just about asleep when I heard, as if from a great distance, a 
            low long whistle that went off in a sudden high note. I was too sleepy to pay any 
            attention, although Johnny didn't have any reason to be whistling like that. He was sitting 
            on the back steps trying to read Gone with the Wind. I had almost decided that I had 
            dreamed the outside world and there was nothing real but baloney sandwiches and the 
            Civil War and the old church and the mist in the valley. It seemed to me that I had always 
            lived in the church, or maybe lived during the Civil War and had somehow got 
            transplanted. That shows you what a wild imagination I have. 
                 A toe nudged me in the ribs. "Glory," said a rough but familiar voice, "he looks 
            different with his hair like that." 
                 I rolled over and sat up, rubbing the sleep out of my eyes and yawning. Suddenly 
            I blinked. 
                 "Hey, Dally!" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               68  	
                 "Hey, Ponyboy!" He grinned down at me. "Or should I say Sleeping Beauty?" 
                 I never thought I'd live to see the day when I would be so glad to see Dally 
            Winston, but right then he meant one thing: contact with the outside world. And it 
            suddenly became real and vital. 
                 "How's Sodapop? Are the fuzz after us? Is Darry all right? Do the boys know 
            where we are? What..." 
                 "Hold on, kid," Dally broke in. "I can't answer everything at once. You two want 
            to go get something to eat first? I skipped breakfast and I'm about starved." 
                 "You're starved?" Johnny was so indignant he nearly squeaked. I remembered the 
            baloney. 
                 "Is it safe to go out?" I asked eagerly. 
                 "Yep." Dally searched his shirt pocket for a cigarette, and finding none, said, 
            "Gotta cancer stick, Johnnycake?" 
                 Johnny tossed him a whole package. 
                 "The fuzz won't be lookin' for you around here," Dally said, lighting up. "They 
            think you've lit out for Texas. I've got Buck's T-bird parked down the road a little way. 
            Goshamighty, boys, ain't you been eatin' anything?" 
                 Johnny looked startled. "Yeah. Whatever gave you the idea we ain't?" 
                 Dally shook his head. "You're both pale and you've lost weight. After this, get out 
            in the sun more. You look like you've been through the mill." 
                 I started to say "Look who's talking" but decided it would be safer not to. Dally 
            needed a shave--- a stubble of colorless beard covered his jaw--- and he looked like he 
            was the one who'd been sleeping in his clothes for a week instead of us; I knew he hadn't 
            seen a barber in months. But it was safer not to get mouthy with Dally Winston. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               69  	
                 "Hey, Ponyboy"--- he fumbled with a piece of paper in his back pocket--- "I gotta 
            letter for you." 
                 "A letter? Who from?" 
                 "The President, of course, stupid. It's from Soda." 
                 "Sodapop?" I said, bewildered. "But how did he know...?" 
                 "He came over to Buck's a couple of days ago for something and found that sweat 
            shirt. I told him I didn't know where you were, but he didn't believe me. He gave me this 
            letter and half his pay check to give you. Kid, you ought to see Darry. He's takin' this 
            mighty hard..." 
                 I wasn't listening. I leaned back against the side of the church and read: 
                     Ponyboy, 
                     Well I guess you got into some trouble, huh? Darry and me 
                     nearly went nuts when you ran out like that. Darry is awful 
                     sorry he hit you. You know he didn't mean it. And then you 
                     and Johnny turned up mising and what with that dead kid 
                     in the park and Dally getting hauled into the station, well it 
                     scared us something awful. The police came by to question 
                     us and we told them as much as we could. I can't believe 
                     little old Johnny could kill somebody. I know Dally knows 
                     where you are, but you know him. He keeps his trap shut 
                     and won't tell me nothing. Darry hasn't got the slightest 
                     notion where you're at and it is nearly killing him. I wish 
                     you'd come back and turn your selfves in but I guess you 
                     can't since Johnny might get hurt. You sure are famous. 
                     You got a paragraph in the newspaper even. Take care and 
                     say hi to Johnny for us. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               70  	
                     Sodapop Curtis 
                 He could improve his spelling, I thought after reading it through three or four 
            times. "How come you got hauled in?" I asked Dally. 
                 "Shoot, kid"--- he grinned wolfishly--- "them boys at the station know me by 
            now. I get hauled in for everything that happens in our turf. While I was there I kinda let 
            it slip that y'all were headin' for Texas. So that's where they're lookin'." 
                 He took a drag on his cigarette and cussed it goodnaturedly for not being a Kool. 
            Johnny listened in admiration. "You sure can cuss good, Dally." 
                 "Sure can," Dally agreed wholeheartedly, proud of his vocabulary. "But don't you 
            kids get to pickin' up my bad habits." 
                 He gave me a hard rub on the head. "Kid, I swear it don't look like you with your 
            hair all cut off. It used to look tuff. You and Soda had the coolest lookin' hair in town." 
                 "I know," I said sourly. "I look lousy, but don't rub it in." 
                 "Do y'all want somethin' to eat or not?" 
                 Johnny and I leaped up. "You'd better believe it" 
                 "Gee," Johnny said wistfully, "it sure will be good to get into a car again." 
                 "Well," Dally drawled, "I'll give you a ride for your money." 
                 Dally always did like to drive fast, as if he didn't care whether he got where he 
            was going or not, and we came down the red dirt road off Jay Mountain doing eighty-
            five. I like fast driving and Johnny was crazy about drag races, but we both got a little 
            green around the gills when Dally took a corner on two wheels with the brakes 
            screaming. Maybe it was because we hadn't been in a car for so long. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               71  	
                 We stopped at a Dairy Queen and the first thing I got was a Pepsi. Johnny and I 
            gorged on barbecue sandwiches and banana splits. 
                 "Glory," Dallas said, amazed, watching us gulp the stuff down. "You don't need to 
            make like every mouthful's your last. I got plenty of money. Take it easy, I don't want 
            you gettin' sick on me. And I thought I was hungry!" 
                 Johnny merely ate faster. I didn't slow down until I got a headache. 
                 "I didn't tell y'all something," Dally said, finishing his third hamburger. "The Socs 
            and us are having all-out warfare all over the city. That kid you killed had plenty of 
            friends and all over town it's Soc against grease. We can't walk alone at all. I started 
            carryin' a heater..." 
                 "Dally!" I said, frightened. "You kill people with heaters!" 
                 "Ya kill 'em with switchblades, too, don't ya, kid?" Dally said in a hard voice. 
            Johnny gulped. "Don't worry," Dally went on, "it ain't loaded. I ain't aimin' to get picked 
            up for murder. But it sure does help a bluff. Tim Shepard's gang and our outfit are havin' 
            it out with the Socs tomorrow night at the vacant lot. We got hold of the president of one 
            of their social clubs and had a war council. Yeah"--- Dally sighed, and I knew he was 
            remembering New York--- "just like the good old days. If they win, things go on as usual. 
            If we do, they stay outa our territory but good. Two-Bit got jumped a few days ago. Darry 
            and me came along in time, but he wasn't havin' too much trouble. Two-Bit's a good 
            fighter. Hey, I didn't tell you we got us a spy." 
                 "A spy?" Johnny looked up from his banana split. "Who?" 
                 'That good-lookin' broad I tried to pick up that night you killed the Soc. The 
            redhead, Cherry what's-her-name."  
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               72  	
                                   Chapter 6 
                 JOHNNY GAGGED AND I almost dropped my hot fudge sundae. "Cherry?" we 
            both said at the same time. "The Soc?" 
                 "Yeah," Dally said. "She came over to the vacant lot the night Two-Bit was 
            jumped. Shepard and some of his outfit and us were hanging around there when she 
            drives up in her little ol' Sting Ray. That took a lot of nerve. Some of us was for jumping 
            her then and there, her bein' the dead kid's girl and all, but Two-Bit stopped us. Man, next 
            time I want a broad I'll pick up my own kind." 
                 "Yeah," Johnny said slowly, and I wondered if, like me, he was remembering 
            another voice, also tough and just deepened into manhood, saying: "Next time you want a 
            broad, pick up your own kind..." It gave me the creeps. 
                 Dally was going on: "She said she felt that the whole mess was her fault, which it 
            is, and that she'd keep up with what was comin' off with the Socs in the rumble and 
            would testify that the Socs were drunk and looking for a fight and that you fought back in 
            self-defense." He gave a grim laugh. "That little gal sure does hate me. I offered to take 
            her over to The Dingo for a Coke and she said 'No, thank you' and told me where I could 
            go in very polite terms." 
                 She was afraid of loving you, I thought. So Cherry Valance, the cheerleader, 
            Bob's girl, the Soc, was trying to help us. No, it wasn't Cherry the Soc who was helping 
            us, it was Cherry the dreamer who watched sunsets and couldn't stand fights. It was hard 
            to believe a Soc would help us, even a Soc that dug sunsets. Dally didn't notice. He had 
            forgotten about it already. 
                 "Man, this place is out of it. What do they do for kicks around here, play 
            checkers?" Dally surveyed the scene without interest. "I ain't never been in the country 
            before. Have you two?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               73  	
                 Johnny shook his head but I said, "Dad used to take us all huntin'. I've been in the 
            country before. How'd you know about the church?" 
                 "I got a cousin that lives around here somewheres. Tipped me off that it'd make a 
            tuff hide-out in case of something. Hey, Ponyboy, I heard you was the best shot in the 
            family." 
                 "Yeah," I said. "Darry always got the most ducks, though. Him and Dad. Soda 
            and I goofed around too much, scared most of our game away." I couldn't tell Dally that I 
            hated to shoot things. He'd think I was soft. 
                 "That was a good idea, I mean cuttin' your hair and bleachin' it. They printed your 
            descriptions in the paper but you sure wouldn't fit 'em now." 
                 Johnny had been quietly finishing his fifth barbecue sandwich, but now he 
            announced: 'We're goin' back and turn ourselves in." 
                 It was Dally's turn to gag. Then he swore awhile. Then he turned to Johnny and 
            demanded: "What?" 
                 "I said we're goin' back and turn ourselves in," Johnny repeated in a quiet voice. I 
            was surprised but not shocked. I had thought about turning ourselves in lots of times, but 
            apparently the whole idea was a jolt to Dallas. 
                 "I got a good chance of bein' let off easy," Johnny said desperately, and I didn't 
            know if it was Dally he was trying to convince or himself. "I ain't got no record with the 
            fuzz and it was self-defense. Ponyboy and Cherry can testify to that. And I don't aim to 
            stay in that church all my life." 
                 That was quite a speech for Johnny. His big black eyes grew bigger than ever at 
            the thought of going to the police station, for Johnny had a deathly fear of cops, but he 
            went on: "We won't tell that you helped us, Dally, and we'll give you back the gun and 
            what's left of the money and say we hitchhiked back so you won't get into trouble. 
            Okay?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               74  	
                 Dally was chewing the corner of his ID card, which gave his age as twenty-one so 
            he could buy liquor. "You sure you want to go back? Us greasers get it worse than 
            anyone else." 
                 Johnny nodded. "I'm sure. It ain't fair for Ponyboy to have to stay up in that 
            church with Darry and Soda worryin' about him all the time. I don't guess..."--- he 
            swallowed and tried not to look eager--- "I don't guess my parents are worried about me 
            or anything?" 
                 "The boys are worried," Dally said in a matter-of-fact voice. "Two-Bit was going 
            to Texas to hunt for you." 
                 "My parents," Johnny repeated doggedly, "did they ask about me?" 
                 "No," snapped Dally, "they didn't. Blast it, Johnny, what do they matter? Shoot, 
            my old man don't give a hang whether I'm in jail or dead in a car wreck or drunk in the 
            gutter. That don't bother me none." 
                 Johnny didn't say anything. But he stared at the dashboard with such hurt 
            bewilderment that I could have bawled. 
                 Dally cussed under his breath and nearly tore out the transmission of the T-bird as 
            we roared out of the Dairy Queen. I felt sorry for Dally. He meant it when he said he 
            didn't care about his parents. But he and the rest of the gang knew Johnny cared and did 
            everything they could to make it up to him. I don't know what it was about Johnny--- 
            maybe that lost puppy look and those big scared eyes were what made everyone his big 
            brother. But they couldn't, no matter how hard they tried, take the place of his parents. I 
            thought about it for a minute--- Darry and Sodapop were my bothers and I loved both of 
            them, even if Darry did scare me; but not even Soda could take Mom and Dad's place. 
            And they were my real brothers, not just sort of adopted ones. No wonder Johnny was 
            hurt because his parents didn't want him. Dally could take it--- Dally was of the breed 
            that could take anything, because he was hard and tough, and when he wasn't, he could 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               75  	
            turn hard and tough. Johnny was a good fighter and could play it cool, but he was 
            sensitive and that isn't a good way to be when you're a greaser. 
                 "Blast it, Johnny," Dally growled as we flew along the red road, "why didn't you 
            think of turning yourself in five days ago? It would have saved a lot of trouble." 
                 "I was scared," Johnny said with conviction. "I still am." He ran his finger down 
            one of his short black sideburns. "I guess we ruined our hair for nothing, Ponyboy." 
                 "I guess so." I was glad we were going back. I was sick of that church. I didn't 
            care if I was bald. 
                 Dally was scowling, and from long and painful experience I knew better than to 
            talk to him when his eyes were blazing like that. I'd likely as not get clobbered over the 
            head. That had happened before, just as it had happened to all the gang at one time or 
            another. We rarely fought among ourselves--- Darry was the unofficial leader, since he 
            kept his head best, Soda and Steve had been best friends since grade school and never 
            fought, and Two-Bit was just too lazy to argue with anyone. Johnny kept his mouth shut 
            too much to get into arguments, and nobody ever fought with Johnny. I kept my mouth 
            shut; too. But Dally was a different matter. If something beefed him, he didn't keep quiet 
            about it, and if you rubbed him the wrong way--- look out. Not even Darry wanted to 
            tangle with him. He was dangerous. 
                 Johnny just sat there and stared at his feet. He hated for any one of us to be mad at 
            him. He looked awful sad. Dally glanced at him out of the corner of his eye. I looked out 
            the window. 
                 "Johnny," Dally said in a a pleading, high voice, using a tone I had never heard 
            from him before, "Johnny, I ain't mad at you. I just don't want you to get hurt. You don't 
            know what a few months in jail can do to you. Oh, blast it, Johnny"--- he pushed his 
            white-blond hair back out of his eyes--- "you get hardened in jail. I don't want that to hap-
            pen to you. Like it happened to me..." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               76  	
                 I kept staring out the window at the rapidly passing scenery, but I felt my eyes 
            getting round. Dally never talked like that. Never. Dally didn't give a Yankee dime about 
            anyone but himself, and he was cold and hard and mean. He never talked about his past 
            or being in jail that way--- if he talked about it at all, it was to brag. And I suddenly 
            thought of Dally... in jail at the age of ten... Dally growing up in the streets... 
                 "Would you rather have me living in hide-outs for the rest of my life, always on 
            the run?" Johnny asked seriously. 
                 If Dally had said yes, Johnny would have gone back to the church without 
            hesitation. He figured Dally knew more than he did, and Dally's word was law. But he 
            never heard Dally's answer, for we had reached the top of Jay Mountain and Dally 
            suddenly slammed on the brakes and stared. "Oh, glory!" he whispered. The church was 
            on fire! 
                 "Let's go see what the deal is," I said, hopping out. 
                 "What for?" Dally sounded irritated. "Get back in here before I beat your head 
            in." 
                 I knew Dally would have to park the car and catch me before he could carry out 
            his threat, and Johnny was already out and following me, so I figured I was safe. We 
            could hear him cussing us out, but he wasn't mad enough to come after us. There was a 
            crowd at the front of the church, mostly little kids, and I wondered how they'd gotten 
            there so quickly. I tapped the nearest grownup. "What's going on?" 
                 "Well, we don't know for sure," the man said with a good-natured grin. "We were 
            having a school picnic up here and the first thing we knew, the place is burning up. 
            Thank goodness this is a wet season and the old thing is worthless anyway." Then, to the 
            kids, he shouted, "Stand back, children. The firemen will be coming soon." 
                 "I bet we started it," I said to Johnny. "We must have dropped a lighted cigarette 
            or something." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               77  	
                 About that time a lady came running up. "Jerry, some of the kids are missing." 
                 "They're probably around here somewhere. You can't tell with all this excitement 
            where they might be." 
                 "No." She shook her head. "They've been missing for at least a half an hour. I 
            thought they were climbing the hill..." 
                 Then we all froze. Faintly, just faintly, you could hear someone yelling. And it 
            sounded like it was coming from inside the church. 
                 The woman went white. "I told them not to play in the church... I told them..." 
            She looked like she was going to start screaming, so Jerry shook her. 
                 "I'll get them, don't worry!" I started at a dead run for the church, and the man 
            caught my arm. "I'll get them. You kids stay out!" 
                 I jerked loose and ran on. All I could think was: We started it. We started it. We 
            started it! 
                 I wasn't about to go through that flaming door, so I slammed a big rock through a 
            window and pulled myself in. It was a wonder I didn't cut myself to death, now that I 
            think about it. 
                 "Hey, Ponyboy." 
                 I looked around, startled. I hadn't realized Johnny had been right behind me all the 
            way. I took a deep breath, and started coughing. The smoke filled my eyes and they 
            started watering. "Is that guy coming?" 
                 Johnny shook his head. "The window stopped him." 
                 "Too scared?" 
                 "Naw..." Johnny gave me a grin. "Too fat" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               78  	
                 I couldn't laugh because I was scared I'd drown in the smoke. The roar and 
            crackling was getting louder, and Johnny shouted the next question. 
                 "Where's the kids?" 
                 "In the back, I guess," I hollered, and we started stumbling through the church. I 
            should be scared, I thought with an odd detached feeling, but I'm not. The cinders and 
            embers began falling on us, stinging and smarting like ants. Suddenly, in the red glow 
            and the haze, I remembered wondering what it was like in a burning ember, and I 
            thought: Now I know, it's a red hell. Why aren't I scared? 
                 We pushed open the door to the back room and found four or five little kids, 
            about eight years old or younger, huddled in a corner. One was screaming his head off, 
            and Johnny yelled, "Shut up! We're goin' to get you out!" The kid looked surprised and 
            quit hollering. I blinked myself--- Johnny wasn't behaving at all like his old self. He 
            looked over his shoulder and saw that the door was blocked by flames, then pushed open 
            the window and tossed out the nearest kid. I caught one quick look at his face; it was red 
            marked from falling embers and sweat streaked, but he grinned at me. He wasn't scared 
            either. That was the only time I can think of when I saw him without that defeated, 
            suspicious look in his eyes. He looked like he was having the time of his life. 
                 I picked up a kid, and he promptly bit me, but I leaned out, the window and 
            dropped him as gently as I could, being in a hurry like that. A crowd was there by that 
            time. Dally was standing there, and when he saw me he screamed, "For Pete's sake, get 
            outa there! That roofs gonna cave in any minute. Forget those blasted kids!" 
                 I didn't pay any attention, although pieces of the old roof were crashing down too 
            close for comfort. I snatched up another kid, hoping he didn't bite, and dropped him with-
            out waiting to see if he landed okay or not. I was coughing so hard I could hardly stand 
            up, and I wished I had time to take off Dally's jacket. It was hot. We dropped the last of 
            the kids out as the front of the church started to crumble. Johnny shoved me toward the 
            window. "Get out!" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               79  	
                 I leaped out the window and heard timber crashing and the flames roaring right 
            behind me. I staggered, almost falling, coughing and sobbing for breath. Then I heard 
            Johnny scream, and as I turned to go back for him, Dally swore at me and clubbed me 
            across the back as hard as he could, and I went down into a peaceful darkness. 
                 WHEN I CAME TO, I was being bounced around, and I ached and smarted, and 
            wondered dimly where I was. I tried to think but there was a high-pitched screaming 
            going on, and I couldn't tell whether it was inside my head or out. Then I realized it was a 
            siren. The fuzz, I thought dully. The cops have come for us. I tried to swallow a groan 
            and wished wildly for Soda. Someone with a cold wet rag was gently sponging off my 
            face, and a voice said, "I think he's coming around." 
                 I opened my eyes. It was dark. I'm moving, I thought. Are they taking me to jail? 
                 "Where...?" I said hoarsely, not able to get anything else out of my mouth. My 
            throat was sore. I blinked at the stranger sitting beside me. But he wasn't a stranger... I'd 
            seen him before... 
                 "Take it easy, kid. You're in an ambulance." 
                 "Where's Johnny?" I cried, frightened at being in this car with strangers. "And 
            Dallas?" 
                 "They're in the other ambulance, right behind us. Just calm down. You're going to 
            be okay. You just passed out" 
                 "I didn't either," I said in the bored, tough voice we reserved for strangers and 
            cops. "Dallas hit me. How come?" 
                 "Because your back was in flames, that's why." 
                 I was surprised. "It was? Golly, I didn't feel it. It don't hurt." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               80  	
                 "We put it out before you got burned. That jacket saved you from a bad burning, 
            maybe saved your life. You just keeled over from smoke inhalation and a little shock--- 
            of course, that slap on the back didn't help much." 
                 I remembered who he was then--- Jerry somebody-or-other who was too heavy to 
            get in the window. He must be a school teacher, I thought. "Are you taking us to the 
            police station?" I was still a little mixed up as to what was coming off. 
                 "The police station?" It was his turn to be surprised. "What would we want to take 
            you to the police station for? We're taking all three of you to the hospital." 
                 I let his first remark slide by. "Are Johnny and Dally all right?" 
                 "Which one's which?" 
                 "Johnny has black hair. Dally's the mean-looking one." 
                 He studied his wedding ring. Maybe he's thinking about his wife, I thought. I 
            wished he'd say something. 
                 "We think the towheaded kid is going to be all right. He burned one arm pretty 
            badly, though, trying to drag the other kid out the window. Johnny, well, I don't know 
            about him. A piece of timber caught him across the back--- he might have a broken back, 
            and he was burned pretty severely. He passed out before he got out the window. They're 
            giving him plasma now." He must have seen the look on my face because he hurriedly 
            changed the subject. "I swear, you three are the bravest kids I've seen in a long time. First 
            you and the black haired kid climbing in that window, and then the tough-looking kid 
            going back in to save him. Mrs. O'Briant and I think you were sent straight from heaven. 
            Or are you just professional heroes or something?" 
                 Sent from heaven? Had he gotten a good look at Dallas? "No, we're greasers," I 
            said. I was too worried and scared to appreciate the fact that he was trying to be funny. 
                 "You're what?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               81  	
                 "Greasers. You know, like hoods, JD's. Johnny is wanted for murder, and Dallas 
            has a record with the fuzz a mile long." 
                 "Are you kidding me?" Jerry stared at me as if he thought I was still in shock or 
            something. 
                 "I am not. Take me to town and you'll find out pretty quick." 
                 "We're taking you to a hospital there anyway. The address card in your billfold 
            said that was where you lived. Your name's really Ponyboy?" 
                 "Yeah. Even on my birth certificate. And don't bug me about it. Are..."--- I felt 
            weak--- "are the little kids okay?" 
                 "Just fine. A little frightened maybe. There were some short explosions right after 
            you all got out. Sounded just exactly like gunfire." 
                 Gunfire. There went our gun. And Gone with the Wind. Were we sent from 
            heaven? I started to laugh weakly. I guess that guy knew how close to hysterics I really 
            was, for he talked to me in a low soothing voice all the way to the hospital. 
                   
                 I WAS SITTING in the waiting room, waiting to hear how Dally and Johnny 
            were. I had been checked over, and except for a few burns and a big bruise across my 
            back, I was all right. I had watched them bring Dally and Johnny in on stretchers. Dally's 
            eyes were closed, but when I spoke he had tried to grin and had told me that if I ever did 
            a stupid thing like that again he'd beat the tar out of me. He was still swearing at me when 
            they took him on in. Johnny was unconscious. I had been afraid to look at him, but I was 
            relieved to see that his face wasn't burned. He just looked very pale and still and sort of 
            sick. I would have cried at the sight of him so still except I couldn't in front of people. 
                 Jerry Wood had stayed with me all the time. He kept thanking me for getting the 
            kids out. He didn't seem to mind our being hoods. I told him the whole story--- starting 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               82  	
            when Dallas and Johnny and I had met at the corner of Pickett and Sutton. I left out the 
            part about the gun and our hitching a ride in the freight car. He was real nice about it and 
            said that being heroes would help get us out of trouble, especially since it was self-
            defense and all. 
                 I was sitting there, smoking a cigarette, when Jerry came back in from making a 
            phone call. He stared at me for a second. "You shouldn't be smoking." 
                 I was startled. "How come?" I looked at my cigarette. It looked okay to me. I 
            looked around for a "No Smoking" sign and couldn't find one. "How come?" 
                 "Why, uh," Jerry stammered, "uh, you're too young." 
                 "I am?" I had never thought about it. Everyone in our neighborhood, even the 
            girls, smoked. Except for Darry, who was too proud of his athletic health to risk a 
            cigarette, we had all started smoking at an early age. Johnny had been smoking since he 
            was nine; Steve started at eleven. So no one thought it unusual when I started. I was the 
            weed-fiend in my family--- Soda smokes only to steady his nerves or when he wants to 
            look tough. 
                 Jerry simply sighed, then grinned. "There are some people here to see you. Claim 
            to be your brothers or something." 
                 I leaped up and ran for the door, but it was already open and Soda had me in a 
            bear hug and was swinging me around. I was so glad to see him I could have bawled. 
            Finally he set me down and looked at me. He pushed my hair back. "Oh, Ponyboy, your 
            hair... your tuff, tuff hair..." 
                 Then I saw Darry. He was leaning in the doorway, wearing his olive jeans and 
            black T-shirt. He was still tall, broad-shouldered Darry; but his fists were jammed in his 
            pockets and his eyes were pleading. I simply looked at him. He swallowed and said in a 
            husky voice, "Ponyboy..." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               83  	
                 I let go of Soda and stood there for a minute. Darry didn't like me... he had driven 
            me away that night... he had hit me... Darry hollered at me all the time... he didn't give a 
            hang about me.... Suddenly I realized, horrified, that Darry was crying. He didn't make a 
            sound, but tears were running down his cheeks. I hadn't seen him cry in years, not even 
            when Mom and Dad had been killed. (I remembered the funeral. I had sobbed in spite of 
            myself; Soda had broken down and bawled like a baby; but Darry had only stood there, 
            his fists in his pockets and that look on his face, the same helpless, pleading look that he 
            was wearing now.) 
                 In that second what Soda and Dally and Two-Bit had been trying to tell me came 
            through. Darry did care about me, maybe as much as he cared about Soda, and because 
            he cared he was trying too hard to make something of me. When he yelled "Pony, where 
            have you been all this time?" he meant "Pony, you've scared me to death. Please be 
            careful, because I couldn't stand it if anything happened to you." 
                 Darry looked down and turned away silently. Suddenly I broke out of my daze. 
                 "Darry!" I screamed, and the next thing I knew I had him around the waist and 
            was squeezing the daylights out of him. 
                 "Darry," I said, "I'm sorry..." 
                 He was stroking my hair and I could hear the sobs racking him as he fought to 
            keep back the tears. "Oh, Pony, I thought we'd lost you... like we did Mom and Dad..." 
                 That was his silent fear then--- of losing another person he loved. I remembered 
            how close he and Dad had been, and I wondered how I could ever have thought him hard 
            and unfeeling. I listened to his heart pounding through his T-shirt and knew everything 
            was going to be okay now. I had taken the long way around, but I was finally home. To 
            stay.  
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               84  	
                                  Chapter 7  
                 NOW THERE WERE three of us sitting in the waiting room waiting to hear how 
            Dally and Johnny were. Then the reporters and the police came. They asked too many 
            questions too fast, and got me mixed up. If you want to know the truth, I wasn't feeling 
            real good in the first place. Kind of sick, really. And I'm scared of policemen anyway. 
            The reporters fired one question right after another at me and got me so confused I didn't 
            know what was coming off. Darry finally told them I wasn't in any shape to be yelled at 
            so much and they slowed down a little. Darry's kinda big. 
                 Sodapop kept them in stitches. He'd grab one guy's press hat and another's camera 
            and walk around interviewing the nurses and mimicking TV reporters. He tried to lift a 
            policeman's gun and grinned so crazily when he was caught that the policeman had to 
            grin too. Soda can make anyone grin. I managed to get hold of some hair grease and 
            comb my hair back so that it looked a little better before they got any pictures. I'd die if I 
            got my picture in the paper with my hair looking so lousy. Darry and Sodapop were in the 
            pictures too; Jerry Wood told me that if Sodapop and Darry hadn't been so good-looking, 
            they wouldn't have taken so many. That was public appeal, he said. 
                 Soda was really getting a kick out of all this. I guess he would have enjoyed it 
            more if it hadn't been so serious, but he couldn't resist anything that caused that much 
            excitement. I swear, sometimes he reminds me of a colt. A long-legged palomino colt 
            that has to get his nose into everything. The reporters stared at him admiringly; I told you 
            he looks like a movie star, and he kind of radiates. 
                 Finally, even Sodapop got tired of the reporter--- he gets bored with the same old 
            thing after a time--- and stretching out on the long bench, he put his head in Darry's lap 
            and went to sleep. I guess both of them were tired--- it was late at night and I knew they 
            hadn't had much sleep during the week. Even while I was answering questions I 
            remembered that it had been only a few hours since I was sleeping off a smoke in the 
            corner of the church. Already it was an unreal dream and yet, at the time I couldn't have 
            imagined any other world. Finally, the reporters started to leave, along with the police. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               85  	
            One of them turned and asked, "What would you do right now if you could do anything 
            you wanted?" 
                 I looked at him tiredly. "Take a bath." 
                 They thought that was pretty funny, but I meant it. I felt lousy. The hospital got 
            real quiet after they left. The only noise was the nurse's soft footsteps and Soda's light 
            breathing. Darry looked down at him and grinned half-heartedly. "He didn't get much 
            sleep this week," he said softly. "He hardly slept at all." 
                 "Hhhmmmm," Soda said drowsily, "you didn't either." 
                 The nurses wouldn't tell us anything about Johnny and Dally, so Darry got hold of 
            the doctor. The doctor told us that he would talk only to the family, but Darry finally got 
            it through the guy's head that we were about as much family as Dally and Johnny had. 
                 Dally would be okay after two or three days in the hospital, he said. One arm was 
            badly burned and would be scarred for the rest of his life, but he would have full use of it 
            in a couple of weeks. Dally'll be okay, I thought. Dallas is always okay. He could take 
            anything. It was Johnny I was worried about. 
                 He was in critical condition. His back had been broken when that piece of timber 
            fell on him. He was in severe shock and suffering from third-degree burns. They were 
            doing everything they could to ease the pain, although since his back was broken he 
            couldn't even feel the burns below his waist. He kept calling for Dallas and Ponyboy. If 
            he lived... If? Please, no, I thought. Please not "if." The blood was draining from my face 
            and Darry put an arm across my shoulder and squeezed hard.... Even if he lived he'd be 
            crippled for the rest of his life. "You wanted it straight and you got it straight," the doctor 
            said. "Now go home and get some rest." 
                 I was trembling. A pain was growing in my throat and I wanted to cry, but 
            greasers don't cry in front of strangers. Some of us never cry at all. Like Dally and Two-
            Bit and Tim Shepard--- they forgot how at an early age. Johnny crippled for life? I'm 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               86  	
            dreaming, I thought in panic, I'm dreaming. I'll wake up at home or in the church and 
            everything'll be like it used to be. But I didn't believe myself. Even if Johnny did live he'd 
            be crippled and never play football or help us out in a rumble again. He'd have to stay in 
            that house he hated, where he wasn't wanted, and things could never be like they used to 
            be. I didn't trust myself to speak. If I said one word, the hard knot in my throat would 
            swell and I'd be crying in spite of myself. 
                 I took a deep breath and kept my mouth shut. Soda was awake by then, and 
            although he looked stony-faced, as if he hadn't heard a word the doctor had said, his eyes 
            were bleak and stunned. Serious reality has a hard time coming through to Soda, but 
            when it does, it hits him hard. He looked like I felt when I had seen that black-haired Soc 
            lying doubled up and still in the moonlight. 
                 Darry was rubbing the back of my head softly. "We'd better go home. We can't do 
            anything here." 
                 In our Ford I was suddenly overcome by sleepiness. I leaned back and closed my 
            eyes and we were home before I knew it. Soda was shaking me gently. "Hey, Ponyboy, 
            wake up. You still got to get to the house." 
                 "Hmmmmm," I said sleepily, and lay down in the seat. I couldn't have gotten up 
            to save my life. I could hear Soda and Darry, but as if from a great distance. 
                 "Oh, come on, Ponyboy," Soda pleaded, shaking me a little harder, "we're sleepy, 
            too." 
                 I guess Darry was tired of fooling around, because he picked me up and carried 
            me in. 
                 "He's getting mighty big to be carried," Soda said. I wanted to tell him to shut up 
            and let me sleep but I only yawned. 
                 "He's sure lost a lot of weight," Darry said. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               87  	
                 I thought sleepily that I should at least pull off my shoes but I didn't. I went to 
            sleep the minute Darry tossed me on the bed. I'd forgotten how soft a bed really was. 
                   
                 I WAS THE FIRST ONE up the next morning. Soda must have pulled my shoes 
            and shirt off for me; I was still wearing my jeans. He must have been too sleepy to 
            undress himself, though; he lay stretched out beside me fully clothed. I wiggled out from 
            under his arm and pulled the blanket up over him, then went to take a shower. Asleep, he 
            looked a lot younger than going-on-seventeen, but I had noticed that Johnny looked 
            younger when he was asleep, too, so I figured everyone did. Maybe people are younger 
            when they are asleep. 
                 After my shower, I put on some clean clothes and spent five minutes or so hunting 
            for a hint of beard on my face and mourning over my hair. That bum haircut made my 
            ears stick out. 
                 Darry was still asleep when I went into the kitchen to fix breakfast. The first one 
            up has to fix breakfast and the other two do the dishes. That's the rule around our house, 
            and usually it's Darry who fixes breakfast and me and Soda who are left with the dishes. I 
            hunted through the icebox and found some eggs. We all like our eggs done differently. I 
            like them hard, Darry likes them in a bacon-and-tomato sandwich, and Sodapop eats his 
            with grape jelly. All three of us like chocolate cake for breakfast. Mom had never 
            allowed it with ham and eggs, but Darry let Soda and me talk him into it. We really didn't 
            have to twist his arm; Darry loves chocolate cake as much as we do. Sodapop always 
            makes sure there's some in the icebox every night and if there isn't he cooks one up real 
            quick. I like Darry's cakes better; Sodapop always puts too much sugar in the icing. I 
            don't see how he stands jelly and eggs and chocolate cake all at once, but he seems to like 
            it. Darry drinks black coffee, and Sodapop and I drink chocolate milk. We could have 
            coffee if we wanted it, but we like chocolate milk. All three of us are crazy about 
            chocolate stuff. Soda says if they ever make a chocolate cigarette I'll have it made. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               88  	
                 "Anybody home?" a familiar voice called through the front screen, and Two-Bit 
            and Steve came in. We always just stick our heads into each other's houses and holler 
            "Hey" and walk in. Our front door is always unlocked in case one of the boys is hacked 
            off at his parents and needs a place to lay over and cool off. We never could tell who 
            we'd find stretched out on the sofa in the morning. It was usually Steve, whose father told 
            him about once a week to get out and never come back. It kind of bugs Steve, even if his 
            old man does give him five or six bucks the next day to make up for it. Or it might be 
            Dally, who lived anywhere he could. Once we even found Tim Shepard, leader of the 
            Shepard gang and far from his own turf, reading the morning paper in the armchair. He 
            merely looked up, said "Hi," and strolled out without staying for breakfast. Two-Bit's 
            mother warned us about burglars, but Darry, flexing his muscles so that they bulged like 
            oversized baseballs, drawled that he wasn't afraid of any burglars, and that we didn't 
            really have anything worth taking. He'd risk a robbery, he said, if it meant keeping one of 
            the boys from blowing up and robbing a gas station or something. So the door was never 
            locked. 
                 "In here!" I yelled, forgetting that Darry and Sodapop were still asleep. "Don't 
            slam the door." 
                 They slammed the door, of course, and Two-Bit came running into the kitchen. 
            He caught me by the upper arms and swung me around, ignoring the fact that I had two 
            uncooked eggs in my hand. 
                 "Hey, Ponyboy," he cried gleefully, "long time no see." 
                 You would have thought it had been five years instead of five days since I'd seen 
            him last, but I didn't mind. I like of Two-Bit; he's a good buddy to have. He spun me into 
            Steve, who gave me a playful slap on my bruised back and shoved me across the room. 
            One of the eggs went flying. It landed on the clock and I tightened my grip on the other 
            one, so that it crushed and ran all over my hand. 
                 "Now look what you did," I griped. "There went our breakfast. Can't you two wait 
            till I set the eggs down before you go shovin' me all over the country?" I really was a 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               89  	
               little mad, because I had just realized how long it had been since I'd eaten anything. The 
               last thing I'd eaten was a hot fudge sundae at the Dairy Queen in Windrixville, and I was 
               hungry. 
                    Two-Bit was walking in a slow circle around me, and I sighed because I knew 
               what was coming. 
                    "Man, dig baldy here!" He was staring at my head as he circled me. "I wouldn't 
               have believed it. I thought all the wild Indians in Oklahoma had been tamed. What little 
               squaw's got that tuff-lookin' mop of yours, Ponyboy?" 
                    "Aw, lay off," I said. I wasn't feeling too good in the first place, kind of like I was 
               coming down with something. Two-Bit winked at Steve, and Steve said, "Why, he had to 
               get a haircut to get his picture in the paper. They'd never believe a greasy lookin' mug 
               could be a hero. How do you like bein' a hero, big shot?" 
                    "How do I like what?" 
                    "Being a hero. You know"--- he shoved the morning paper at me impatiently--- 
               "like a big shot, even." 
                    I stared at the newspaper. On the front page of the second section was the 
               headline: JUVENILE DELINQUENTS TURN HEROES. 
                    "What I like is the 'turn' bit," Two-Bit said, cleaning the egg up off the floor. 
               "Y'all were heroes from the beginning. You just didn't 'turn' all of a sudden." 
                    I hardly heard him. I was reading the paper. That whole page was covered with 
               stories about us--- the fight, the murder, the church burning, the Socs being drunk, 
               everything. My picture was there, with Darry and Sodapop. The article told how Johnny 
               and I had risked our lives saving those little kids, and there was a comment from one of 
               the parents, who said that they would all have burned to death if it hadn't been for us. It 
               told the whole story of our fight with the Socs--- only they didn't say "Socs," because 
               most grownups don't know about the battles that go on between us. They had interviewed 
               The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	                           90  	
            Cherry Valance, and she said Bob had been drunk and that the boys had been looking for 
            a fight when they took her home. Bob had told her he'd fix us for picking up his girl. His 
            buddy Randy Adderson, who had helped lump us, also said it was their fault and that 
            we'd only fought back in self-defense. But they were charging Johnny with manslaughter. 
            Then I discovered that I was supposed to appear at juvenile court for running away, and 
            Johnny was too, if he recovered. (Not if, I thought again. Why do they keep saying if?) 
            For once, there weren't any charges against Dally, and I knew he'd be mad because the 
            paper made him out a hero for saving Johnny and didn't say much about his police record, 
            which he was kind of proud of. He'd kill those reporters if he got hold of them. There was 
            another column about just Darry and Soda and me: how Darry worked on two jobs at 
            once and made good at both of them, and about his outstanding record at school; it 
            mentioned Sodapop dropping out of school so we could stay together, and that I made the 
            honor roll at school all the time and might be a future track star. (Oh, yeah, I forgot--- I'm 
            on the A-squad track team, the youngest one. I'm a good runner.) Then it said we 
            shouldn't be separated after we had worked so hard to stay together. 
                 The meaning of that last line finally hit me. "You mean..."--- I swallowed hard--- 
            "that they're thinking about putting me and Soda in a boys' home or something?" 
                 Steve was carefully combing back his hair in complicated swirls. "Somethin' like 
            that" 
                 I sat down in a daze. We couldn't get hauled off now. Not after me and Darry had 
            finally got through to each other, and now that the big rumble was coming up and we 
            would settle this Soc-greaser thing once and for all. Not now, when Johnny needed us 
            and Dally was still in the hospital and wouldn't be out for the rumble. 
                 "No," I said out loud, and Two-Bit, who was scraping the egg off the clock, 
            turned to stare at me. 
                 "No what?" 
                 "No, they ain't goin' to put us in a boys' home." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               91  	
                 "Don't worry about it," Steve said, cocksure that he and Sodapop could handle 
            anything that came up. "They don't do things like that to heroes. Where're Soda and 
            Superman?" 
                 That was as far as he got, because Darry, shaved and dressed, came in behind 
            Steve and lifted him up off the floor, then dropped him. We all call Darry "Superman" or 
            "Muscles" at one time or another; but one time Steve made the mistake of referring to 
            him as "all brawn and no brain," and Darry almost shattered Steve's jaw. Steve didn't call 
            him that again, but Darry never forgave him; Darry has never really gotten over not going 
            to college. That was the only time I've ever seen Soda mad at Steve, although Soda 
            attaches no importance to education. School bored him. No action. 
                 Soda came running in. "Where's that blue shirt I washed yesterday?" He took a 
            swig of chocolate milk out of the container. 
                 "Hate to tell you, buddy," Steve said, still flat on the floor, "but you have to wear 
            clothes to work. There's a law or something." 
                 "Oh, yeah," Soda said. "Where're those wheat jeans, too?" 
                 "I ironed. They're in my closet," Darry said. "Hurry up, you're gonna be late." 
                 Soda ran back, muttering, "I'm hurryin', I'm hurryin'." 
                 Steve followed him and in a second there was the general racket of a pillow fight. 
            I absentmindedly watched Darry as he searched the icebox for chocolate cake. 
                 "Darry," I said suddenly, "did you know about the juvenile court?" 
                 Without fuming to look at me he said evenly, "Yeah, the cops told me last night." 
                 I knew then that he realized we might get separated. I didn't want to worry him 
            any more, but I said, "I had one of those dreams last night. The one I can't ever 
            remember." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               92  	
                          Darry spun around to face me, genuine fear on his face. "What?"     
                          I HAD A NIGHTMARE the night of Mom and Dad's funeral. I'd had nightmares 
                   and wild dreams every once in a while when I was little, but nothing like this one. I woke 
                   up screaming bloody murder. And I never could remember what it was that had scared 
                   me. It scared Sodapop and Darry almost as bad as it scared me; for night after night, for 
                   weeks on end, I would dream this dream and wake up in a cold sweat or screaming. And I 
                   never could remember exactly what happened in it. Soda began sleeping with me, and it 
                   stopped recurring so often, but it happened often enough for Darry to take me to a doctor. 
                   The doctor said I had too much imagination. He had a simple cure, too: Study harder, 
                   read more, draw more, and play football more. After a hard game of football and four or 
                   five hours of reading, I was too exhausted, mentally and physically, to dream anything. 
                   But Darry never got over it, and every once in a while he would ask me if I ever dreamed 
                   any more. 
                          "Was it very bad?" Two-Bit questioned. He knew the whole story, and having 
                   never dreamed about anything but blondes, he was interested. 
                          "No," I lied. I had awakened in a cold sweat and shivering, but Soda was dead to 
                   the world. I had just wiggled closer to him and stayed awake for a couple of hours, 
                   trembling under his arm. That dream always scared the heck out of me. 
                          Darry started to say something, but before he could begin, Sodapop and Steve 
                   came in. 
                          "You know what?" Sodapop said to no one in particular. "When we stomp the 
                   Socies good, me and Stevie here are gonna throw a big party and everybody can get 
                   stoned. Then we'll go chase the Socs clear to Mexico." 
                          "Where you gonna get the dough, little man?" Darry had found the cake and was 
                   handing out pieces. 
                          "I'll think of somethin'," Sodapop assured him between bites. 
                   The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	                                               93  	
                 "You going to take Sandy to the party?" I asked, just to be saying something. 
            Instant silence. I looked around. "What's the deal?" 
                 Sodapop was staring at his feet, but his ears were reddening. "No. She went to 
            live with her grandmother in Florida." 
                 "How come?" 
                 "Look," Steve said, surprisingly angry, "does he have to draw you a picture? It 
            was either that or get married, and her parents almost hit the roof at the idea of her 
            marryin' a sixteen-year-old kid." 
                 "Seventeen," Soda said softly. "I'll be seventeen in a couple of weeks." 
                 "Oh," I said, embarrassed. Soda was no innocent; I had been in on bull sessions 
            and his bragging was as loud as anyone's. But never about Sandy. Not ever about Sandy. 
            I remembered how her blue eyes had glowed when she looked at him, and I was sorry for 
            her. 
                 There was a heavy silence. Then Darry said, "We'd better get on to work, Pepsi-
            Cola." Darry rarely called Soda by Dad's pet nickname for him, but he did so then 
            because he knew how miserable Sodapop was about Sandy. 
                 "I hate to leave you here by yourself, Ponyboy," Darry said slowly. "Maybe I 
            ought to take the day off." 
                 "I've stayed by my lonesome before. You can't afford a day off." 
                 "Yeah, but you just got back and I really ought to stay..." 
                 "I'll baby-sit him," Two-Bit said, ducking as I took a swing at him. "I haven't got 
            anything better to do." 
                 "Why don't you get a job?" Steve said. "Ever consider working for a living?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               94  	
                 "Work?" Two-Bit was aghast. "And ruin my rep? I wouldn't be baby-sittin'the kid 
            here if I knew of some good day-nursery open on Saturdays." 
                 I pulled his chair over backward and jumped on him, but he had me down in a 
            second. I was kind of short on wind. I've got to cut out smoking or I won't make track 
            next year. 
                 "Holler uncle." 
                 "Nope," I said, struggling, but I didn't have my usual strength. 
                 Darry was pulling on his jacket. "You two do up the dishes. You can go to the 
            movies if you want to before you go see Dally and Johnny." He paused for a second, 
            watching Two-Bit squash the heck out of me. "Two-Bit, lay off. He ain't lookin' so good. 
            Ponyboy, you take a couple of aspirins and go easy. You smoke more than a pack today 
            and I'll skin you. Understood?" 
                 "Yeah," I said, getting to my feet. "You carry more than one bundle of roofing at 
            a time today and me and Soda'll skin you. Understood?" 
                 He grinned one of his rare grins. "Yeah. See y'all this afternoon." 
                 "Bye," I said. I heard our Ford's vvrrrooooom and thought: Soda's driving. And 
            they left. 
                 "...anyway, I was walking around downtown and started to take this short cut 
            through an alley"--- Two-Bit was telling me about one of his many exploits while we did 
            the dishes. I mean, while I did the dishes. He was sitting on the cabinet, sharpening that 
            black handled switchblade he was so proud of---"... and I ran into three guys. I says 
            'Howdy' and they just look at each other. Then one says 'We would jump you but since 
            you're as slick as us we figger you don't have nothin' worth takin'.' I says 'Buddy, that's 
            the truth' and went right on. Moral: What's the safest thing to be when one is met by a 
            gang of social outcasts in an alley?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               95  	
                 "A judo expert?" I suggested. 
                 "No, another social outcast!" Two-Bit yelped, and nearly fell off the cabinet from 
            laughing so hard. I had to grin, too. He saw things straight and made them into something 
            funny. 
                 "We're gonna clean up the house," I said. "The reporters or police or somebody 
            might come by, and anyway, it's time for those guys from the state to come by and check 
            up on us." 
                 "This house ain't messy. You oughtta see my house." 
                 "I have. And if you had the sense of a billy goat you'd try to help around your 
            place instead of bumming around." 
                 "Shoot, kid, if I ever did that my mom would die of shock." 
                 I liked Two-Bit's mother. She had the same good humor and easygoing ways that 
            he did. She wasn't lazy like him, but she let him get away with murder. I don't know, 
            though--- it's just about impossible to get mad at him. 
                 When we had finished, I pulled on Dally's brown leather jacket--- the back was 
            burned black--- and we started for Tenth Street. 
                 "I would drive us," Two-Bit said as we walked up the street trying to thumb a 
            ride, "but the brakes are out on my car. Almost killed me and Kathy the other night" He 
            flipped the collar of his black leather jacket up to serve as a windbreak while he lit a 
            cigarette. "You oughtta see Kathy's brother. Now there's a hood. He's so greasy he glides 
            when he walks. He goes to the barber for an oil change, not a haircut" 
                 I would have laughed, but I had a terrific headache. We stopped at the Tasty 
            Freeze to buy Cokes and rest up, and the blue Mustang that had been trailing us for eight 
            blocks pulled in. I almost decided to run, and Two-Bit must have guessed this, for he 
            shook his head ever so slightly and tossed me a cigarette. As I lit up, the Socs who had 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               96  	
            jumped Johnny and me at the park hopped out of the Mustang. I recognized Randy 
            Adderson, Marcia's boyfriend, and the tall guy that had almost drowned me. I hated them. 
            It was their fault Bob was dead; their fault Johnny was dying; their fault Soda and I might 
            get put in a boys' home. I hated them as bitterly and as contemptuously as Dally Winston 
            hated. 
                 Two-Bit put an elbow on my shoulder and leaned against me, dragging on his 
            cigarette. "You know the rules. No jazz before the rumble," he said to the Socs. 
                 "We know," Randy said. He looked at me. "Come here. I want to talk to you." 
                 I glanced at Two-Bit. He shrugged. I followed Randy over to his car, out of 
            earshot of the rest. We sat there in his car for a second, silent. Golly, that was the tuffest 
            car I've ever been in. 
                 "I read about you in the paper," Randy said finally. "How come?" 
                 I don't know. Maybe I felt like playing hero." 
                 "I wouldn't have. I would have let those kids burn to death." 
                 "You might not have. You might have done the same thing." 
                 Randy pulled out a cigarette and pressed in the car lighter. "I don't know. I don't 
            know anything anymore. I would never have believed a greaser could pull something like 
            that." 
                 " 'Greaser' didn't have anything to do with it. My buddy over there wouldn't have 
            done it. Maybe you would have done the same thing, maybe a friend of yours wouldn't 
            have. It's the individual." 
                 "I'm not going to show at the rumble tonight," Randy said slowly. 
                 I took a good look at him. He was seventeen or so, but he was already old. Like 
            Dallas was old. Cherry had said her friends were too cool to feel anything, and yet she 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               97  	
            could remember watching sunsets. Randy was supposed to be too cool to feel anything, 
            and yet there was pain in his eyes. 
                 "I'm sick of all this. Sick and tired. Bob was a good guy. He was the best buddy a 
            guy ever had. I mean, he was a good fighter and tuff and everything, but he was a real 
            person too. You dig?" 
                 I nodded. 
                 "He's dead--- his mother has had a nervous breakdown. They spoiled him rotten. I 
            mean, most parents would be proud of a kid like that--- good-lookin' and smart and 
            everything, but they gave in to him all the time. He kept trying to make someone say 'No' 
            and they never did. They never did. That was what he wanted. For somebody to tell him 
            'No.' To have somebody lay down the law, set the limits, give him something solid to 
            stand on. That's what we all want, really. One time..."--- Randy tried to grin, but I could 
            tell he was close to tears--- "one time he came home drunker than anything. He thought 
            sure they were gonna raise the roof. You know what they did? They thought it was 
            something they'd done. They thought it was their fault--- that they'd failed him and driven 
            him to it or something. They took all the blame and didn't do anything to him. If his old 
            man had just belted him--- just once, he might still be alive. I don't know why I'm telling 
            you this. I couldn't tell anyone else. My friends--- they'd think I was off my rocker or 
            turning soft. Maybe I am. I just know that I'm sick of this whole mess. That kid--- your 
            buddy, the one that got burned--- he might die?" 
                 "Yeah," I said, trying not to think about Johnny. 
                 "And tonight... people get hurt in rumbles, maybe killed. I'm sick of it because it 
            doesn't do any good. You can't win, you know that, don't you?" And when I remained 
            silent he went on: "You can't win, even if you whip us. You'll still be where you were 
            before--- at the bottom. And we'll still be the lucky ones with all the breaks. So it doesn't 
            do any good, the fighting and the killing. It doesn't prove a thing. We'll forget it if you 
            win, or if you don't. Greasers will still be greasers and Soes will still be Socs. Sometimes 
            I think it's the ones in the middle that are really the lucky stiffs..." He took a eep breath. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               98  	
            "So I'd fight if I thought it'd do any good. I think I'm going to leave town. Take my little 
            old Mustang and all the dough I can carry and get out." 
                 "Running away won't help." 
                 "Oh, hell, I know it," Randy half-sobbed, "but what can I do? I'm marked chicken 
            if I punk out at the rumble, and I'd hate myself if I didn't. I don't know what to do." 
                 "I'd help you if I could," I said. I remembered Cherry's voice: Things are rough all 
            over. I knew then what she meant. 
                 He looked at me. "No, you wouldn't. I'm a Soc. You get a little money and the 
            whole world hates you." 
                 "No," I said, "you hate the whole world." 
                 He just looked at me--- from the way he looked he could have been ten years 
            older than he was. I got out of the car. "You would have saved those kids if you had been 
            there," h said. "You'd have saved them the same as we did." 
                 "Thanks, grease," he said, trying to grin. Then he stopped. "I didn't mean that. I 
            meant, thanks, kid." 
                 "My name's Ponyboy," I said. "Nice talkin' to you, Randy." 
                 I walked over to Two-Bit, and Randy honked for his friends to come and get into 
            the car. 
                 "What'd he want?" Two-Bit asked. "What'd Mr. Super-Soc have to say?" 
                 "He ain't a Soc," I said, "he's just a guy. He just wanted to talk." 
                 "You want to see a movie before we go see Johnny and Dallas?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	               99  	
                 "Nope," I said, lighting up another weed. I still had a headache, but I felt better. 
            Socs were just guys after all. Things were rough all over, but it was better that way. That 
            way you could tell the other guy was human too. 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              100  	
                                   Chapter 8 
                 THE NURSES WOULDN'T let us see Johnny. He was in critical condition. No 
            visitors. But Two-Bit wouldn't take no for an answer. That was his buddy in there and he 
            aimed to see him. We both begged and pleaded, but we were getting nowhere until the 
            doctor found out what was going on. 
                 "Let them go in," he said to the nurse. "He's been asking for them. It can't hurt 
            now." 
                 Two-Bit didn't notice the expression in his voice. It's true, I thought numbly, he is 
            dying. We went in, practically on tiptoe, because the quietness of the hospital scared us. 
            Johnny was lying still, with his eyes closed, but when Two-Bit said, "Hey, Johnnykid," 
            he opened them and looked at us, trying to grin. "Hey, y'all." 
                 The nurse, who was pulling the shades open, smiled and said, "So he can talk 
            after all." 
                 Two-Bit looked around. "They treatin' you okay, kid?" 
                 "Don't..." ---Johnny gasped--- "don't let me put enough grease on my hair." 
                 "Don't talk," Two-Bit said, pulling up a chair, "just listen. We'll bring you some 
            hair grease next time. We're havin' the big rumble tonight" 
                 Johnny's huge black eyes widened a little, but he didn't say anything. 
                 "It's too bad you and Dally can't be in it. It's the first big rumble we've had--- not 
            countin' the time we whipped Shepard's outfit" 
                 "He came by," Johnny said. 
                 "Tim Shepard?" 
                 Johnny nodded. "Came to see Dally." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              101  	
                 Tim and Dallas had always been buddies. 
                 "Did you know you got your name in the paper for being a hero?" 
                 Johnny almost grinned as he nodded. "Tuff enough," he managed, and by the way 
            his eyes were glowing, I figured Southern gentlemen had nothing on Johnny Cade. 
                 I could see that even a few words were tiring him out; he was as pale as the pillow 
            and looked awful. Two-Bit pretended not to notice. 
                 "You want anything besides hair grease, kid?" 
                 Johnny barely nodded. "The book"--- he looked at me--- "can you get another 
            one?" 
                 Two-Bit looked at me too. I hadn't told him about Gone with the Wind. 
                 "He wants a copy of Gone with the Wind so I can read it to him," I explained. 
            "You want to run down to the drugstore and get one?" 
                 "Okay," Two-Bit said cheerfully. "Don't y'all run off." 
                 I sat down in Two-Bit's chair and tried to think of something to say. "Dally's 
            gonna be okay," I said finally. "And Darry and me, we're okay now." 
                 I knew Johnny understood what I meant. We had always been close buddies, and 
            those lonely days in the church strengthened our friendship. He tried to smile again, and 
            then suddenly went white and closed his eyes tight. 
                 "Johnny!" I said, alarmed. "Are you okay?" 
                 He nodded, keeping his eyes closed. "Yeah, it just hurts sometimes. It usually 
            don't... I can't feel anything below the middle of my back..." 
                 He lay breathing heavily for a moment. "I'm pretty bad off, ain't I, Pony?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              102  	
                 "You'll be okay," I said with fake cheerfulness. "You gotta be. We couldn't get 
            along without you." 
                 The truth of that last statement hit me. We couldn't get along without him. We 
            needed Johnny as much as he needed the gang. And for the same reason. 
                 "I won't be able to walk again," Johnny started, then faltered. "Not even on 
            crutches. Busted my back." 
                 "You'll be okay," I repeated firmly. Don't start crying, I commanded myself, don't 
            start crying, you'll scare Johnny. 
                 "You want to know something, Ponyboy? I'm scared stiff. I used to talk about 
            killing myself..." He drew a quivering breath. "I don't want to die now. It ain't long 
            enough. Sixteen years ain't long enough. I wouldn't mind it so much if there wasn't so 
            much stuff I ain't done yet--- and so many things I ain't seen. It's not fair. You know 
            what? That time we were in Windrixville was the only time I've been away from our 
            neighborhood." 
                 "You ain't gonna die," I said, trying to hold my voice down. "And don't get juiced 
            up, because the doc won't let us see you no more if you do." 
                 Sixteen years on the streets and you can learn a lot. But all the wrong things, not 
            the things you want to learn. Sixteen years on the streets and you see a lot. But all the 
            wrong sights, not the sights you want to see. 
                 Johnny closed his eyes and rested quietly for a minute. Years of living on the East 
            Side teaches you how to shut off your emotions. If you didn't, you would explode. You 
            learn to cool it. 
                 A nurse appeared in the doorway. "Johnny," she said quietly, "your mother's here 
            to see you." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              103  	
                 Johnny opened his eyes. At first they were wide with surprise, then they darkened. 
            "I don't want to see her," he said firmly. 
                 "She's your mother." 
                 "I said I don't want to see her." His voice was rising. "She's probably come to tell 
            me about all the trouble I'm causing her and about how glad her and the old man'll be 
            when I'm dead. Well, tell her to leave me alone. For once" ---his voice broke--- "for once 
            just to leave me alone." He was struggling to sit up, but he suddenly gasped, went whiter 
            than the pillowcase, and passed out cold. 
                 The nurse hurried me out the door. "I was afraid of something like this if he saw 
            anyone." 
                 I ran into Two-Bit, who was coming in. 
                 "You can't see him now," the nurse said, so Two-Bit handed her the book. "Make 
            sure he can see it when he comes around." She took it and closed the door behind her. 
            Two-Bit stood and looked at the door a long time. "I wish it was any one of us except 
            Johnny," he said, and his voice was serious for once. "We could get along without anyone 
            but Johnny." 
                 Turning abruptly, he said, "Let's go see Dallas." 
                 As we walked out into the hall, we saw Johnny's mother. I knew her. She was a 
            little woman, with straight black hair and big black eyes like Johnny's. But that was as far 
            as the resemblance went. Johnnycake's eyes were fearful and sensitive; hers were cheap 
            and hard. As we passed her she was saying, "But I have a right to see him. He's my son. 
            After all the trouble his father and I've gone to to raise him, this is our reward: He'd rather 
            see those no-count hoodlums than his own folks..." She saw us and gave us such a look of 
            hatred that I almost backed up. "It was your fault. Always running around in the middle 
            of the night getting jailed and heaven knows what else..." I thought she was going to cuss 
            us out. I really did. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              104  	
                 Two-Bit's eyes got narrow and I was afraid he was going to start something. I 
            don't like to hear women get sworn at, even if they deserve it. "No wonder he hates your 
            guts," Two-Bit snapped. He was going to tell her off real good, but I shoved him along. I 
            felt sick. No wonder Johnny didn't want to see her. No wonder he stayed overnight at 
            Two-Bit's or at our house, and slept in the vacant lot in good weather. I remembered my 
            mother... beautiful and golden, like Soda, and wise and firm, like Darry. 
                 "Oh, lordy!" There was a catch in Two-Bit's voice and he was closer to tears than 
            I'd ever seen him. "He has to live with that." 
                 We hurried to the elevator to get to the next floor. I hoped the nurse would have 
            enough sense not to let Johnny's mother see him. It would kill him. 
                   
                 DALLY WAS ARGUING with one of the nurses when we came in. He grinned at 
            us. "Man, am I glad to see you! These--- hospital people won't let me smoke, and I want 
            out!" 
                 We sat down, grinning at each other. Dally was his usual mean, ornery self. He 
            was okay. 
                 "Shepard came by to see me a while ago." 
                 "That's what Johnny said. What'd he want?" 
                 "Said he saw my picture in the paper and couldn't believe it didn't have 'Wanted 
            Dead or Alive' under it. He mostly came to rub it in about the rumble. Man, I hate not 
            bein' in that." 
                 Only last week Tim Shepard had cracked three of Dally's ribs. But Dally and Tim 
            Shepard had always been buddies; no matter how they fought, they were two of a kind, 
            and they knew it. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              105  	
                 Dally was grinning at me. "Kid, you scared the devil outa me the other day. I 
            thought I'd killed you." 
                 "Me?" I said, puzzled. "Why?" 
                 "When you jumped out of the church. I meant to hit you just hard enough to 
            knock you down and put out the fire, but when you dropped like a ton of lead I thought 
            I'd aimed too high and broke your neck." He thought for a minute. "I'm glad I didn't, 
            though." 
                 "I'll bet," I said with a grin. I'd never liked Dally--- but then, for the first time, I 
            felt like he was my buddy. And all because he was glad he hadn't killed me. 
                 Dally looked out the window. "Uh..." ---he sounded very casual--- "how's the 
            kid?" 
                 "We just left him," Two-Bit said, and I could tell that he was debating whether to 
            tell Dally the truth or not. "I don't know about stuff like this... but... well, he seemed 
            pretty bad to me. He passed out cold before we left him." 
                 Dally's jaw line went white as he swore between clenched teeth. 
                 "Two-Bit, you still got that fancy black-handled switch?" 
                 "Yeah." 
                 "Give it here." 
                 Two-Bit reached into his back pocket for his prize possession. It was a jet handled 
            switchblade, ten inches long, that would flash open at a mere breath. It was the reward of 
            two hours of walking aimlessly around a hardware store to divert suspicion. He kept it 
            razor sharp. As far as I knew, he had never pulled it on anyone; he used his plain 
            pocketknife when he needed a blade. But it was his showpiece, his pride and joy--- every 
            time he ran into a new hood he pulled it out and showed off with it. Dally knew how 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              106  	
            much that knife meant to Two-Bit, and if he needed a blade bad enough to ask for it, 
            well, he needed a blade. That was all there was to it. Two-Bit handed it over to Dally 
            without a moment's hesitation. 
                 "We gotta win that fight tonight," Dally said. His voice was hard. "We gotta get 
            even with the Socs. For Johnny." 
                 He put the switch under his pillow and lay back, staring at the ceiling. We left. 
            We knew better than to talk to Dally when his eyes were blazing and he was in a mood 
            like that. 
                 We decided to catch a bus home. I just didn't feel much like walking or trying to 
            hitch a ride. Two-Bit left me sitting on the bench at the bus stop while he went to a gas 
            station to buy some cigarettes. I was kind of sick to my stomach and sort of groggy. I was 
            nearly asleep when I felt someone's hand on my forehead. I almost jumped out of my 
            skin. Two-Bit was looking down at me worriedly. "You feel okay? You're awful hot." 
                 "I'm all right," I said, and when he looked at me as if he didn't believe me, I got a 
            little panicky. "Don't tell Darry, okay? Come on, Two-Bit, be a buddy. I'll be well by 
            tonight. I'll take a bunch of aspirins." 
                 "All right," Two-Bit said reluctantly. "But Darry'll kill me if you're really sick and 
            go ahead and fight anyway." 
                 "I'm okay," I said, getting a little angry. "And if you keep your mouth shut, Darry 
            won't know a thing." 
                 "You know somethin'?" Two-Bit said as we were riding home on the bus. "You'd 
            think you could get away with murder, living with your big brother and all, but Darry's 
            stricter with you than your folks were, ain't he?" 
                 "Yeah," I said, "but they'd raised two boys before me. Darry hasn't." 
                 "You know, the only thing that keeps Darry from bein' a Soc is us." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              107  	
                 "I know" I said. I had known it for a long time. In spite of not having much 
            money, the only reason Darry couldn't be a Soc was us. The gang. Me and Soda. Darry 
            was too smart to be a greaser. I don't know how I knew, I just did. And I was kind of 
            sorry. 
                 I was silent most of the way home. I was thinking about the rumble. I had a sick 
            feeling in my stomach and it wasn't from being ill. It was the same kind of helplessness 
            I'd felt that night Darry yelled at me for going to sleep in the lot. I had the same deathly 
            fear that something was going to happen that none of us could stop. As we got off the bus 
            I finally said it. "Tonight--- I don't like it one bit." 
                 Two-Bit pretended not to understand. "I never knew you to play chicken in a 
            rumble before. Not even when you was a little kid." 
                 I knew he was trying to make me mad, but I took the bait anyway. "I ain't 
            chicken, Two-Bit Mathews, and you know it," I said angrily. "Ain't I a Curtis, same as 
            Soda and Darry?" 
                 Two-Bit couldn't deny this, so I went on: "I mean, I got an awful feeling 
            something's gonna happen." 
                 "Somethin' is gonna happen. We're gonna stomp the Socs' guts, that's what." 
                 Two-Bit knew what I meant, but doggedly pretended not to. He seemed to feel 
            that if you said something was all right, it immediately was, no matter what. He's been 
            that way all his life, and I don't expect he'll change. Sodapop would have understood, and 
            we would have tried to figure it out together, but Two-Bit just ain't Soda. Not by a long 
            shot. 
                 Cherry Valance was sitting in her Corvette by the vacant lot when we came by. 
            Her long hair was pinned up, and in daylight she was even better looking. That Sting Ray 
            was one tuff car. A bright red one. It was cool. 
                 "Hi, Ponyboy," she said. "Hi, Two-Bit." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              108  	
                 Two-Bit stopped. Apparently Cherry had shown up there before during the week 
            Johnny and I had spent in Windrixville. 
                 "What's up with the big times?" 
                 She tightened the strings on her ski jacket. "They play your way. No weapons, fair 
            deal. Your rules." 
                 "You sure?" 
                 She nodded. "Randy told me. He knows for sure." 
                 Two-Bit turned and started home. "Thanks, Cherry." 
                 "Ponyboy, stay a minute," Cherry said. I stopped and went back to her car. 
            "Randy's not going to show up at the rumble." 
                 "Yeah," I said, "I know." 
                 "He's not scared. He's just sick of fighting. Bob..." She swallowed, then went on 
            quietly. "Bob was his best buddy. Since grade school." 
                 I thought of Soda and Steve. What if one of them saw the other killed? Would that 
            make them stop fighting? No, I thought, maybe it would make Soda stop, but not Steve. 
            He'd go on hating and fighting. Maybe that was what Bob would have done if it had been 
            Randy instead of him. 
                 "How's Johnny?" 
                 "Not so good," I said. "Will you go up to see him?" 
                 She shook her head. "No. I couldn't." 
                 "Why not?" I demanded. It was the least she could do. It was her boyfriend who 
            had caused it all... and then I stopped. Her boyfriend... 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              109  	
                 "I couldn't," she said in a quiet, desperate voice. "He killed Bob. Oh, maybe Bob 
            asked for it. I know he did. But I couldn't ever look at the person who killed him. You 
            only knew his bad side. He could be sweet sometimes, and friendly. But when he got 
            drunk... it was that part of him that beat up Johnny. I knew it was Bob when you told me 
            the story. He was so proud of his rings. Why do people sell liquor to boys? Why? I know 
            there's a law against it, but kids get it anyway. I can't go see Johnny. I know I'm too 
            young to be in love and all that, but Bob was something special. He wasn't just any boy. 
            He had something that made people follow him, something that marked him different, 
            maybe a little better, than the crowd. Do you know what I mean?" 
                 I did. Cherry saw the same things in Dallas. That was why she was afraid to see 
            him, afraid of loving him. I knew what she meant all right. But she also meant she 
            wouldn't go see Johnny because he had killed Bob. "That's okay," I said sharply. It wasn't 
            Johnny's fault Bob was a booze-hound and Cherry went for boys who were bound for 
            trouble. "I wouldn't want you to see him. You're a traitor to your own kind and not loyal 
            to us. Do you think your spying for us makes up for the fact that you're sitting there in a 
            Corvette while my brother drops out of school to get a job? Don't you ever feel sorry for 
            us. Don't you ever try to give us handouts and then feel high and mighty about it." 
                 I started to turn and walk off, but something in Cherry's face made me stop. I was 
            ashamed--- I can't stand to see girls cry. She wasn't crying, but she was close to it. 
                 "I wasn't trying to give you charity, Ponyboy. I only wanted to help. I liked you 
            from the start... the way you talked. You're a nice kid, Ponyboy. Do you realize how 
            scarce nice kids are nowadays? Wouldn't you try to help me if you could?" 
                 I would. I'd help her and Randy both, if I could. "Hey," I said suddenly, "can you 
            see the sunset real good from the West Side?" 
                 She blinked, startled, then smiled. "Real good." 
                 "You can see it good from the East Side, too," I said quietly. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              110  	
                 "Thanks, Ponyboy." She smiled through her tears. "You dig okay." 
                 She had green eyes. I went on, walking home slowly. 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              111  	
                                   Chapter 9 
                 IT WAS ALMOST six-thirty when I got home. The rumble was set for seven, so I 
            was late for supper, as usual. I always come in late. I forget what time it is. Darry had 
            cooked dinner: baked chicken and potatoes and corn--- two chickens because all three of 
            us eat like horses. Especially Darry. But although I love baked chicken, I could hardly 
            swallow any. I swallowed five aspirins, though, when Darry and Soda weren't looking. I 
            do that all the time because I can't sleep very well at night. Darry thinks I take just one, 
            but I usually take four. I figured five would keep me going through the rumble and 
            maybe get rid of my headache. 
                 Then I hurried to take a shower and change clothes. Me and Soda and Darry 
            always got spruced up before a rumble. And besides, we wanted to show those Socs we 
            weren't trash, that we were just as good as they were. 
                 "Soda," l called from the bathroom, "when did you start shaving?" 
                 "When I was fifteen," he yelled back. 
                 "When did Darry?" 
                 'When he was thirteen. Why? You figgerin' on growing a beard for the rumble?" 
                 "You're funny. We ought to send you in to the Reader's Digest. I hear they pay a 
            lot for funny things." 
                 Soda laughed and went right on playing poker with Steve in the living room. 
            Darry had on a tight black T-shirt that showed every muscle on his chest and even the flat 
            hard muscles of his stomach. I'd hate to be the Soc who takes a crack at him, I thought as 
            I pulled on a clean T-shirt and a fresh pair of jeans. I wished my T-shirt was tighter--- I 
            have a pretty good build for my size, but I'd lost a lot of weight in Windrixville and it just 
            didn't fit right. It was a chilly night and Tshirts aren't the warmest clothes in the world, 
            but nobody ever gets cold in a rumble, and besides, jackets interfere with your swinging 
            ability. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              112  	
                 Soda and Steve and I had put on more hair oil than was necessary, but we wanted 
            to show that we were greasers. Tonight we could be proud of it. Greasers may not have 
            much, but they have a rep. That and long hair. (What kind of world is it where all I have 
            to be proud of is a reputation for being a hood, and greasy hair? I don't want to be a hood, 
            but even if I don't steal things and mug people and get boozed up, I'm marked lousy. Why 
            should I be proud of it? Why should I even pretend to be proud of it?) Darry never went 
            in for the long hair. His was short and clean all the time. 
                 I sat in the armchair in the living room, waiting for the rest of the outfit to show 
            up. But of course, tonight the only one coming would be Two-Bit; Johnny and Dallas 
            wouldn't show. Soda and Steve were playing cards and arguing as usual. Soda was 
            keeping up a steady stream of wisecracks and clowning, and Steve had turned up the 
            radio so loud that it almost broke my eardrums. Of course everybody listens to it loud 
            like that, but it wasn't just the best thing for a headache. 
                 "You like fights, don't you, Soda?" I asked suddenly. 
                 "Yeah, sure." He shrugged. "I like fights." 
                 "How come?" 
                 "I don't know." He looked at me, puzzled. "It's action. It's a contest. Like a drag 
            race or a dance or something." 
                 "Shoot," said Steve, "I want to beat those Socs' heads in. When I get in a fight I 
            want to stomp the other guy good. I like it, too." 
                 "How come you like fights, Darry?" I asked, looking up at him as he stood behind 
            me, leaning in the kitchen doorway. He gave me one of those looks that hide what he's 
            thinking, but Soda piped up: "He likes to show off his muscles." 
                 "I'm gonna show 'em off on you, little buddy, if you get any mouthier." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              113  	
                 I digested what Soda had said. It was the truth. Darry liked anything that took 
            strength, like weight lifting or playing football or roofing houses, even if he was proud of 
            being smart too. Darry never said anything about it, but I knew he liked fights. I felt out 
            of things. I'll fight anyone anytime, but I don't like to. 
                 "I don't know if you ought to be in this rumble, Pony," Darry said slowly. 
                 Oh, no, I thought in mortal fear, I've got to be in it. Right then the most important 
            thing in my life was helping us whip the Socs. Don't let him make me stay home now. 
            I've got to be in it. 
                 "How come? I've always come through before, ain't I?" 
                 "Yeah," Darry said with a proud grin. "You fight real good for a kid your size. 
            But you were in shape before. You've lost weight and you don't look so great, kid. You're 
            tensed up too much." 
                 "Shoot," said Soda, trying to get the ace out of his shoe without Steve's seeing 
            him, "we all get tensed up before a rumble. Let him fight tonight. Skin never hurt anyone-
            -- no weapons, no danger." 
                 "I'll be okay," I pleaded. "I'll get hold of a little one, okay?" 
                 "Well, Johnny won't be there this time..." ---Johnny and I sometimes ganged up 
            on one big guy--- "but then, Curly Shepard won't be there either, or Dally, and we'll need 
            every man we can get." 
                 "What happened to Shepard?" I asked, remembering Tim Shepard's kid brother. 
            Curly, who was a tough, cool, hard-as-nails Tim in miniature, and I had once played 
            chicken by holding our cigarette ends against each other's fingers. We had stood there, 
            clenching our teeth and grimacing, with sweat pouring down our faces and the smell of 
            burning flesh making us sick, each refusing to holler, until Tim happened to stroll by. 
            When he saw that we were really burning holes in each other he cracked our heads 
            together, swearing to kill us both if we ever pulled a stunt like that again. I still have the 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              114  	
            scar on my forefinger. Curly was an average downtown hood, tough and not real bright, 
            but I liked him. He could take anything. 
                 "He's in the cooler," Steve said, kicking the ace out of Soda's shoe. "In the 
            reformatory." 
                 Again? I thought, and said, "Let me fight, Darry. If it was blades or chains or 
            something it'd be different. Nobody ever gets really hurt in a skin rumble." 
                 "Well"--- Darry gave in--- "I guess you can. But be careful, and if you get in a 
            jam, holler and I'll get you out." 
                 "I'll be okay," I said wearily. "How come you never worry about Sodapop as 
            much? I don't see you lecturin' him." 
                 "Man"--- Darry grinned and put his arm across Soda's shoulders--- "this is one kid 
            brother I don't have to worry about" 
                 Soda punched him in the ribs affectionately. 
                 "This kiddo can use his head." 
                 Sodapop looked down at me with mock superiority, but Darry went on: "You can 
            see he uses it for one thing--- to grow hair on." He ducked Soda's swing and took off for 
            the door. 
                 Two-Bit stuck his head in the door just as Darry went flying out of it. Leaping as 
            he went off the steps, Darry turned a somersault in mid-air, hit the ground, and bounced 
            up before Soda could catch him. 
                 "Welup," Two-Bit said cheerfully, cocking an eyebrow, "I see we are in prime 
            condition for a rumble. Is everybody happy?" 
                 "Yeah!" screamed Soda as he too did a flying somersault off the steps. He flipped 
            up to walk on his hands and then did a no-hands cartwheel across the yard to beat Darry's 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              115  	
            performance. The excitement was catching. Screeching like an Indian, Steve went 
            running across the lawn in flying leaps, stopped suddenly, and flipped backward. We 
            could all do acrobatics because Darry had taken a course at the Y and then spent a whole 
            summer teaching us everything he'd learned on the grounds that it might come in handy 
            in a fight. It did, but it also got Two-Bit and Soda jailed once. They were doing mid-air 
            flips down a downtown sidewalk, walking on their hands and otherwise disturbing the 
            public and the police. Leave it to those two to pull something like that. 
                 With a happy whoop I did a no-hands cartwheel off the porch steps, hit the 
            ground, and rolled to my feet. Two-Bit followed me in a similar manner. 
                 "I am a greaser," Sodapop chanted. "I am a JD and a hood. I blacken the name of 
            our fair city. I beat up people. I rob gas stations. I am a menace to society. Man, do I have 
            fun!" 
                 "Greaser... greaser... greaser..." Steve singsonged. "O victim of environment, 
            underprivileged, rotten, no-count hood!" 
                 "Juvenile delinquent, you're no good!" Darry shouted. 
                 "Get thee hence, white trash," Two-Bit said in a snobbish voice. "I am a Soc. I am 
            the privileged and the well-dressed. I throw beer blasts, drive fancy cars, break windows 
            at fancy parties." 
                 "And what do you do for fun?" I inquired in a serious, awed voice. 
                 "I jump greasers!" Two-Bit screamed, and did a cartwheel. 
                 We settled down as we walked to the lot. Two-Bit was the only one wearing a 
            jacket; he had a couple of cans of beer stuffed in it. He always gets high before a rumble. 
            Before anything else, too, come to think of it. I shook my head. I'd hate to see the day 
            when I had to get my nerve from a can. I'd tried drinking once before. The stuff tasted 
            awful, I got sick, had a headache, and when Darry found out, he grounded me for two 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              116  	
            weeks. But that was the last time Id ever drink. Id seen too much of what drinking did for 
            you at Johnny's house. 
                 "Hey, Two-Bit," I said, deciding to complete my survey, "how come you like to 
            fight?" 
                 He looked at me as if I was off my nut. "Shoot, everybody fights." 
                 If everybody jumped in the Arkansas River, ol' Two-Bit would be right on their 
            heels. I had it then. Soda fought for fun, Steve for hatred, Darry for pride, and Two-Bit 
            for conformity. Why do I fight? I thought, and couldn't think of any real good reason. 
            There isn't any real good reason for fighting except self-defense. 
                 "Listen, Soda, you and Ponyboy," Darry said as we strode down the street, "if the 
            fuzz show, you two beat it out of there. The rest of us can only get jailed. You two can 
            get sent to a boys' home." 
                 "Nobody in this neighborhood's going to call the fuzz," Steve said grimly. 'They 
            know what'd happen if they did." 
                 "All the same, you two blow at the first sign of trouble. You hear me?" 
                 "You sure don't need an amplifier," Soda said, and stuck out his tongue at the 
            back of Darry's head. I stifled a giggle. If you want to see something funny, it's a tough 
            hood sticking his tongue out at his big brother. 
                 TIM SHEPARD AND company were already waiting when we arrived at the 
            vacant lot, along with a gang from Brumly, one of the suburbs. Tim was a lean, catlike 
            eighteen-year-old who looked like the model JD you see in movies and magazines. He 
            had the right curly black hair, smoldering dark eyes, and a long scar from temple to chin 
            where a tramp had belted him with a broken pop bottle. He had a tough, hard look to him, 
            and his nose had been broken twice. Like Dally's, his smile was grim and bitter. He was 
            one of those who enjoy being a hood. The rest of his bunch were the same way. The boys 
            from Brumly, too. Young hoods--- who would grow up to be old hoods. I'd never thought 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              117  	
            about it before, but they'd just get worse as they got older, not better. I looked at Darry. 
            He wasn't going to be any hood when he got old. He was going to get somewhere. Living 
            the way we do would only make him more determined to get somewhere. That's why he's 
            better than the rest of us, I thought. He's going somewhere. And I was going to be like 
            him. I wasn't going to live in a lousy neighborhood all my life. 
                 Tim had the tense, hungry look of an alley cat--- that's what he's always reminded 
            me of, an alley cat--- and he was constantly restless. His boys ranged from fifteen to 
            nineteen, hard-looking characters who were used to the strict discipline Tim gave out. 
            That was the difference between his gang and ours--- they had a leader and were 
            organized; we were just buddies who stuck together--- each man was his own leader. 
            Maybe that was why we could whip them. 
                 Tim and the leader of the Brumly outfit moved forward to shake hands with each 
            of us--- proving that our gangs were on the same side in this fight, although most of the 
            guys in those two outfits weren't exactly what Id like to call my friends. When Tim got to 
            me he studied me, maybe remembering how his kid brother and I had played chicken. 
            "You and the quiet black-headed kid were the ones who killed that Soc?" 
                 "Yeah," I said, pretending to be proud of it; then I thought of Cherry and Randy 
            and got a sick feeling in my stomach. 
                 "Good goin', kid. Curly always said you were a good kid. Curly's in the 
            reformatory for the next six months." Tim grinned ruefully, probably thinking of his 
            roughneck, hard-headed brother. "He got caught breakin' into a liquor store, the little..." 
            He went on to call Curly every unprintable name under the sun--- in Tim's way of 
            thinking, terms of affection. 
                 I surveyed the scene with pride. I was the youngest one there. Even Curly, if he 
            had been there, had turned fifteen, so he was older than me. I could tell Darry realized 
            this too, and although he was proud, I also knew he was worried. Shoot, I thought, I'll 
            fight so good this time he won't ever worry about me again. I'll show him that someone 
            besides Sodapop can use his head. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              118  	
                 One of the Brumly guys waved me over. We mostly stuck with our own outfits, 
            so I was a little leery of going over to him, but I shrugged. He asked to borrow a weed, 
            then lit up. "That big guy with y'all, you know him pretty well?" 
                 "I ought to, he's my brother," I said. I couldn't honestly say "Yes." I knew Darry 
            as well as he knew me, and that isn't saying a whole lot. 
                 "No kiddin'? I got a feelin' he's gonna be asked to start the fireworks around here. 
            He a pretty good bopper?" 
                 He meant rumbler. Those Brumly boys have weird vocabularies. l doubt if half of 
            them can read a newspaper or spell much more than their names, and it comes out in their 
            speech. I mean, you take a guy that calls a rumble "bop-action," and you can tell he isn't 
            real educated. 
                 "Yep," I said. "But why him?" 
                 He shrugged. "Why anybody else?" 
                 I looked our outfits over. Most greasers don't have real tuff builds or anything. 
            They're mostly lean and kind of panther-looking in a slouchy way. This is partly because 
            they don't eat much and partly because they're slouchy. Darry looked like he could whip 
            anyone there. I think most of the guys were nervous because of the 'no weapons' rule. I 
            didn't know about the Brumly boys, but I knew Shepard's gang were used to fighting with 
            anything they could get their hands on--- bicycle chains, blades, pop bottles, pieces of 
            pipe, pool sticks, or sometimes even heaters. I mean guns. I have a kind of lousy 
            vocabulary, too, even if I am educated. Our gang never went in for weapons. We're just 
            not that rough. The only weapons we ever used were knives, and shoot, we carried them 
            mostly just for looks. Like Two-Bit with his black-handled switch. None of us had ever 
            really hurt anybody, or wanted to. Just Johnny. And he hadn't wanted to. 
                 "Hey, Curtis!" Tim yelled. I jumped. 
                 "Which one?" I heard Soda yell back. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              119  	
                 "The big one. Come on over here." 
                 The guy from Brumly looked at me. "What did I tell ya?" 
                 I watched Darry going toward Tim and the leader of the Brumly boys. He 
            shouldn't be here, I thought suddenly. I shouldn't be here and Steve shouldn't be here and 
            Soda shouldn't be here and Two-Bit shouldn't be here. We're greasers, but not hoods, and 
            we don't belong with this bunch of future convicts. We could end up like them, I thought. 
            We could. And the thought didn't help my headache. 
                 I went back to stand with Soda and Steve and Two-Bit then, because the Socs 
            were arriving. Right on time. They came in four carloads, and filed out silently. I counted 
            twenty-two of them. There were twenty of us, so I figured the odds were as even as we 
            could get them. Darry always liked to take on two at a time anyway. They looked like 
            they were all cut from the same piece of cloth: clean shaven with semi-Beatle haircuts, 
            wearing striped or checkered shirts with light red or tan-colored jackets or madras ski 
            jackets. They could just as easily have been going to the movies as to a rumble. That's 
            why people don't ever think to blame the Socs and are always ready to jump on us. We 
            look hoody and they look decent. It could be just the other way around--- half of the 
            hoods I know are pretty decent guys underneath all that grease, and from what I've heard, 
            a lot of Socs are just cold-blooded mean--- but people usually go by looks. 
                 They lined up silently, facing us, and we lined up facing them. I looked for Randy 
            but didn't see him. I hoped he wasn't there. A guy with a madras shirt stepped up. "Let's 
            get the rules straight--- nothing but our fists, and the first to run lose. Right?" 
                 Tim flipped away his beer can. "You savvy real good." 
                 There was an uneasy silence: Who was going to start it? Darry solved the 
            problem. He stepped forward under the circle of light made by the street lamp. For a 
            minute, everything looked unreal, like a scene out of a JD movie or something. Then 
            Darry said, "I'll take on anyone." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              120  	
                 He stood there, tall, broad-shouldered, his muscles taut under his T-shirt and his 
            eyes glittering like ice. For a second it looked like there wasn't anyone brave enough to 
            take him on. Then there was a slight stir in the faceless mob of Socs, and a husky blond 
            guy stepped forward. He looked at Darry and said quietly, "Hello, Darrel." 
                 Something flickered behind Darry's eyes and then they were ice again. "Hello, 
            Paul." 
                 I heard Soda give a kind of squeak and I realized that the blond was Paul Holden. 
            He had been the best halfback on Darry's football team at high school and he and Darry 
            used to buddy it around all the time. He must be a junior in college by now, I thought. He 
            was looking at Darry with an expression I couldn't quite place, but disliked. Contempt? 
            Pity? Hate? All three? Why? Because Darry was standing there representing all of us, and 
            maybe Paul felt only contempt and pity and hate for greasers? Darry hadn't moved a 
            muscle or changed expression, but you could see he hated Paul now. It wasn't only 
            jealousy--- Darry had aright to be jealous; he was ashamed to be on our side, ashamed to 
            be seen with the Brumly boys, Shepard's gang, maybe even us. Nobody realized it but me 
            and Soda. It didn't matter to anyone but me and Soda. 
                 That's stupid, I thought swiftly, they've both come here to fight and they're both 
            supposed to be smarter than that. What difference does the side make? 
                 Then Paul said, "I'll take you," and something like a smile crossed Darry's face. I 
            knew Darry had thought he could take Paul any time. But that was two or three years ago. 
            What if Paul was better now? I swallowed. Neither one of my brothers had ever been 
            beaten in a fight, but I wasn't exactly itching for someone to break the record. 
                 They moved in a circle under the light, counterclockwise, eyeing each other, 
            sizing each other up, maybe remembering old faults and wondering if they were still 
            there. The rest of us waited with mounting tension. I was reminded of Jack London's 
            books--- you know, where the wolf pack waits in silence for one of two members to go 
            down in a fight. But it was different here. The moment either one swung a punch, the 
            rumble would be on. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              121  	
                 The silence grew heavier, and I could hear the harsh heavy breathing of the boys 
            around me. Still Darry and the Soc walked slowly in a circle. Even I could feel their 
            hatred. They used to be buddies, I thought, they used to be friends, and now they hate 
            each other because one has to work for a living and the other comes from the West Side. 
            They shouldn't hate each other... I don't hate the Socs any more... they shouldn't hate... 
                 "Hold up!" a familiar voice yelled. "Hold it!" Darry turned to see who it was, and 
            Paul swung--- a hard right to the jaw that would have felled anyone but Darry. The 
            rumble was on. Dallas Winston ran to join us. 
                 I couldn't find a Soc my size, so I took the next-best size and jumped on him. 
            Dallas was right beside me, already on top of someone. 
                 "I thought you were in the hospital," I yelled as the Soc knocked me to the ground 
            and I rolled to avoid getting kicked. 
                 "I was." Dally was having a hard time because his left arm was still in bad shape. 
            "I ain't now." 
                 "How?" I managed to ask as the Soc I was fighting leaped on me and we rolled 
            near Dally. 
                 "Talked the nurse into it with Two-Bit's switch. Don't you know a rumble ain't a 
            rumble unless I'm in it?" 
                 I couldn't answer because the Soc, who was heavier than I took him for, had me 
            pinned and was slugging the sense out of me. I thought dizzily that he was going to knock 
            some of my teeth loose or break my nose or something, and I knew I didn't have a 
            chance. But Darry was keeping an eye out for me; he caught that guy by the shoulder and 
            half lifted him up before knocking him three feet with a sledge-hammer blow. I decided it 
            would be fair for me to help Dally since he could use only one arm. 
                 They were slugging it out, but Dallas was getting the worst of it, so I jumped on 
            his Soc's back, pulling his hair and pounding him. He reached back and caught me by the 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              122  	
            neck and threw me over his head to the ground. Tim Shepard, who was fighting two at 
            once, accidentally stepped on me, knocking my breath out. I was up again as soon as I got 
            my wind, and jumped right back on the Soc, trying my best to strangle him. While he was 
            prying my fingers loose, Dally knocked him backward, so that all three of us rolled on the 
            ground, gasping, cussing, and punching. 
                 Somebody kicked me hard in the ribs and I yelped in spite of myself. Some Soc 
            had knocked out one of our bunch and was kicking me as hard as he could. But I had both 
            arms wrapped around the other Soc's neck and refused to let go. Dally was slugging him, 
            and I hung on desperately, although that other Soc was kicking me and you'd better 
            believe it hurt. Finally he kicked me in the head so hard it stunned me, and I lay limp, 
            trying to clear my mind and keep from blacking out. I could hear the racket, but only 
            dimly through the buzzing in my ears. Numerous bruises along my back and on my face 
            were throbbing, but I felt detached from the pain, as if it wasn't really me feeling it. 
                 "They're running!" I heard a voice yell joyfully. "Look at the dirty--- run!" 
                 It seemed to me that the voice belonged to Two-Bit, but I couldn't be sure. I tried 
            to sit up, and saw that the Socs were getting into their cars and leaving. Tim Shepard was 
            swearing blue and green because his nose was broken again, and the leader of the Brumly 
            boys was working over one of his own men because he had broken the rules and used a 
            piece of pipe in the fighting. Steve lay doubled up and groaning about ten feet from me. 
            We found out later he had three broken ribs. Sodapop was beside him, talking in a low 
            steady voice. I did a double take when I saw Two-Bit--- blood was streaming down one 
            side of his face and one hand was busted wide open; but he was grinning happily because 
            the Socs were running. 
                 "We won," Darry announced in a tired voice. He was going to have a black eye 
            and there was a cut across his forehead. "We beat the Socs." 
                 Dally stood beside me quietly for a minute, trying to grasp the fact that we had 
            really beaten the Socs. Then, grabbing my shirt, he hauled me to my feet. "Come on!" He 
            half dragged me down the street. "We're goin' to see Johnny." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              123  	
                 I tried to run but stumbled, and Dally impatiently shoved me along. "Hurry! He 
            was gettin' worse when I left. He wants to see you." 
                 I don't know how Dallas could travel so fast and hard after being knocked around 
            and having his sore arm hurt some more, but I tried to keep up with him. Track wasn't 
            ever like the running I did that night. I was still dizzy and had only a dim realization of 
            where I was going and why. 
                 Dally had Buck Merril's T-bird parked in front of our house, and we hopped into 
            it. I sat tight as Dally roared the car down the street. We were on Tenth when a siren 
            came on behind us and I saw the reflection of the red light flashing in the windshield. 
                 "Look sick," Dally commanded. "I'll say I'm taking you to the hospital, which'll 
            be truth enough." 
                 I leaned against the cold glass of the window and tried to look sick, which wasn't 
            too hard, feeling the way I did right then. 
                 The policeman looked disgusted. "All right, buddy, where's the fire?" 
                 "The kid"--- Dally jerked a thumb toward me--- "he fell over on his motorcycle 
            and I'm takin' him to the hospital." 
                 I groaned, and it wasn't all fake-out. I guess I looked pretty bad, too, being cut and 
            bruised like I was. 
                 The fuzz changed his tone. "Is he real bad? Do you need an escort?" 
                 "How would I know if he's bad or not? I ain't no doc. Yeah, we could use an 
            escort." And as the policeman got back into his car I heard Dally hiss, "Sucker!" 
                 With the siren ahead of us, we made record time getting to the hospital. All the 
            way there Dally kept talking and talking about something, but I was too dizzy to make 
            most of it out. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              124  	
                 "I was crazy, you know that, kid? Crazy for wantin' Johnny to stay outa trouble, 
            for not wantin' him to get hard. If he'd been like me he'd never have been in this mess. If 
            he'd got smart like me he'd never have run into that church. That's what you get for 
            helpin' people. Editorials in the paper and a lot of trouble.... You'd better wise up, Pony... 
            you get tough like me and you don't get hurt. You look out for yourself and nothin' can 
            touch you..." 
                 He said a lot more stuff, but I didn't get it all. I had a stupid feeling that Dally was 
            out of his mind, the way he kept raving on and on, because Dallas never talked like that, 
            but I think now I would have understood if I hadn't been sick at the time. 
                 The cop left us at the hospital as Dally pretended to help me out of the car. The 
            minute the cop was gone; Dally let go of me so quick I almost fell. "Hurry!" 
                 We ran through the lobby and crowded past people into the elevator. Several 
            people yelled at us, I think because we were pretty racked-up looking, but Dally had 
            nothing on his mind except Johnny, and I was too mixed up to know anything but that I 
            had to follow Dally. When we finally got to Johnny's room, the doctor stopped us. "I'm 
            sorry, boys, but he's dying." 
                 "We gotta see him," Dally said, and flicked out Two-Bit's switchblade. His voice 
            was shaking. "We're gonna see him and if you give me any static you'll end up on your 
            own operatin' table." 
                 The doctor didn't bat an eye. "You can see him, but it's because you're his friends, 
            not because of that knife." 
                 Dally looked at him for a second, then put the knife back in his pocket. We both 
            went into Johnny's room, standing there for a second, getting our breath back in heavy 
            gulps. It was awful quiet. It was scary quiet. I looked at Johnny. He was very still, and for 
            a moment I thought in agony: He's dead already. We're too late. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              125  	
                 Dally swallowed, wiping the sweat off his upper lip. "Johnnycake?" he said in a 
            hoarse voice. "Johnny?" 
                 Johnny stirred weakly, then opened his eyes. "Hey," he managed softly. 
                 "We won," Dally panted. "We beat the Socs. We stomped them--- chased them 
            outa our territory." 
                 Johnny didn't even try to grin at him. "Useless... fighting's no good...." He was 
            awful white. 
                 Dally licked his lips nervously. "They're still writing editorials about you in the 
            paper. For being a hero and all." He was talking too fast and too calmly. "Yeah, they're 
            calling you a hero now and heroizin' all the greasers. We're all proud of you, buddy." 
                 Johnny's eyes glowed. Dally was proud of him. That was all Johnny had ever 
            wanted. 
                 "Ponyboy." 
                 I barely heard him. I came closer and leaned over to hear what he was going to 
            say. 
                 "Stay gold, Ponyboy. Stay gold..." The pillow seemed to sink a little, and Johnny 
            died. 
                 You read about people looking peacefully asleep when they're dead, but they 
            don't. Johnny just looked dead. Like a candle with the flame gone. I tried to say 
            something, but I couldn't make a sound. 
                 Dally swallowed and reached over to push Johnny's hair back. "Never could keep 
            that hair back... that's what you get for tryin' to help people, you little punk, that's what 
            you get..." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              126  	
                 Whirling suddenly, he slammed back against the wall. His face contracted in 
            agony, and sweat streamed down his face. 
                 "Damnit, Johnny..." he begged, slamming one fist against the wall, hammering it 
            to make it obey his will. "Oh, damnit, Johnny, don't die, please don't die..." 
                 He suddenly bolted through the door and down the hall. 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              127  	
                                  Chapter 10 
                 I WALKED DOWN THE hall in a daze. Dally had taken the car and I started the 
            long walk home in a stupor. Johnny was dead. But he wasn't. That still body back in the 
            hospital wasn't Johnny. Johnny was somewhere else--- maybe asleep in the lot, or playing 
            the pinball machine in the bowling alley, or sitting on the back steps of the church in 
            Windrixville. I'd go home and walk by the lot, and Johnny would be sitting on the curb 
            smoking a cigarette, and maybe we'd lie on our backs and watch the stars. He isn't dead, I 
            said to myself. He isn't dead. And this time my dreaming worked. I convinced myself that 
            he wasn't dead. 
                 I must have wandered around for hours; sometimes even out into the street, 
            getting honked at and cussed out. I might have stumbled around all night except for a 
            man who asked me if I wanted a ride. 
                 "Huh? Oh. Yeah, I guess so," I said. I got in. The man, who was in his mid-
            twenties, looked at me. 
                 "Are you all right, kid? You look like you've been in a fight." 
                 "I have been. A rumble. I'm okay." Johnny is not dead, I told myself, and I 
            believed it. 
                 "Hate to tell you this, kiddo," the guy said dryly, "but you're bleedin' all over my 
            car seats." 
                 I blinked. "I am?" 
                 "Your head." 
                 I reached up to scratch the side of my head where it'd been itching for a while, 
            and when I looked at my hand it was smeared with blood. 
                 "Gosh, mister, I'm sorry," I said, dumfounded. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              128  	
                 "Don't worry about it. This wreck's been through worse. What's your address? I'm 
            not about to dump a hurt kid out on the streets this time of night." 
                 I told him. He drove me to my house, and I got out. "Thanks a lot." 
                 What was left of our gang was in the living room. Steve was stretched out on the 
            sofa, his shirt unbuttoned and his side bandaged. His eyes were closed, but when the door 
            shut behind me he opened them, and I suddenly wondered if my own eyes looked as 
            feverish and bewildered as his. Soda had a wide cut on his lip and a bruise across his 
            cheek. There was a Band-Aid over Darry's forehead and he had a black eye. One side of 
            Two-Bits face was taped up--- I found out later he had four stitches in his cheek and 
            seven in his hand where he had busted his knuckles open over a Soc's head. They were 
            lounging around, reading the paper and smoking. 
                 Where's the party? I thought dully. Weren't Soda and Steve planning a party after 
            the rumble? They all looked up when I walked in. Dairy leaped to his feet. 
                 "Where have you been?" 
                 Oh, let's don't start that again, I thought. He stopped suddenly. 
                 "Ponyboy, what's the matter?" 
                 I looked at all of them, a little frightened. "Johnny... he's dead." My voice sounded 
            strange, even to me. But he's not dead, a voice in my head said. "We told him about 
            beatin' the Socs and... I don't know, he just died." He told me to stay gold, I remembered. 
            What was he talking about? 
                 There was a stricken silence. I don't think any of us had realized how bad off 
            Johnny really had been. Soda made a funny noise and looked like he was going to start 
            crying. Two-Bit's eyes were closed and his teeth were clenched, and I suddenly 
            remembered Dally.... Dally pounding on the wall. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              129  	
                 "Dallas is gone," I said. "He ran out like the devil was after him. He's gonna blow 
            up. He couldn't take it." 
                 How can I take it? I wondered. Dally is tougher than I am. Why can I take it when 
            Dally can't? And then I knew. Johnny was the only thing Dally loved. And now Johnny 
            was gone. 
                 "So he finally broke." Two-Bit spoke everyone's feelings. "So even Dally has a 
            breaking point." 
                 I started shaking. Darry said something in a low voice to Soda. 
                 "Ponyboy," Soda said softly, like he was talking to an injured animal, "you look 
            sick. Sit down." 
                 I backed up, just like a frightened animal, shaking my head. "I'm okay." I felt sick. 
            I felt as if any minute I was going to fall flat on my face, but I shook my head. "I don't 
            want to sit down." 
                 Darry took a step toward me, but I backed away. "Don't touch me," I said. My 
            heart was pounding in slow thumps, throbbing at the side of my head, and I wondered if 
            everyone else could hear it. Maybe that's why they're all looking at me, I thought, they 
            can hear my heart beating... 
                 The phone rang, and after a moment's hesitation, Darry turned from me to it. He 
            said "Hello" and then listened. He hung up quickly. 
                 "It was Dally. He phoned from a booth. He's, just robbed a grocery store and the 
            cops are after him. We gotta hide him. He'll be at the lot in a minute." 
                 We all left the house at a dead run, even Steve, and I wondered vaguely why no 
            one was doing somersaults off the steps this time. Things were sliding in and out of 
            focus, and it seemed funny to me that I couldn't run in a straight line. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              130  	
                   
                 WE REACHED THE vacant lot just as Dally came in, running as hard as he 
            could, from the opposite direction. The wail of a siren grew louder and then police car 
            pulled up across the street from the lot. Doors slammed as the policemen leaped out. 
            Dally had reached the circle of light under the street lamp, and skidding to a halt, he 
            turned and jerked a black object from his waistband. I remembered his voice: I been 
            carryin' a heater. It ain't loaded, but it sure does held a bluff. 
                 It was only yesterday that Dally had told Johnny and me that. But yesterday was 
            years ago. A lifetime ago. 
                 Dally raised the gun, and I thought: You blasted fool. They don't know you're 
            only bluffing. And even as the policemen's guns spit fire into the night I knew that was 
            what Dally wanted. He was jerked half around by the impact of the bullets, then slowly 
            crumpled with a look of grim triumph on his face. He was dead before he hit the ground. 
            But I knew that was what he wanted, even as the lot echoed with the cracks of shots, even 
            as I begged silently--- Please, not him... not him and Johnny both ---I knew he would be 
            dead, because Dally Winston wanted to be dead and he always got what he wanted. 
                 Nobody would write editorials praising Dally. Two friends of mine had died that 
            night: one a hero, the other a hoodlum. But I remembered Dally pulling Johnny through 
            the window of the burning church; Dally giving us his gun, although it could mean jail 
            for him; Dally risking his life for us, trying to keep Johnny out of trouble. And now he 
            was a dead juvenile delinquent and there wouldn't be any editorials in his favor. Dally 
            didn't die a hero. He died violent and young and desperate, just like we all knew he'd die 
            someday. Just like Tim Shepard and Curly Shepard and the Brumly boys and the other 
            guys we knew would die someday. But Johnny was right. He died gallant. 
                 Steve stumbled forward with a sob, but Soda caught him by the shoulders. 
                 "Easy, buddy, easy," I heard him say softly, "there's nothing we can do now." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              131  	
                 Nothing we can do... not for Dally or Johnny or Tim Shepard or any of us... My 
            stomach gave a violent start and turned into a hunk of ice. The world was spinning 
            around me, and blobs of faces and visions of things past were dancing in the red mist that 
            covered the lot. It swirled into a mass of colors and I felt myself swaying on my feet. 
            Someone cried, "Glory, look at the kid!" 
                 And the ground rushed up to meet me very suddenly. 
                   
                 WHEN I WOKE UP it was light. It was awfully quiet. Too quiet. I mean, our 
            house just isn't naturally quiet. The radio's usually going full blast and the TV is turned 
            up loud and people are wrestling and knocking over lamps and tripping over the coffee 
            table and yelling at each other. Something was wrong, but I couldn't quite figure it out. 
            Something had happened... I couldn't remember what. I blinked at Soda bewilderedly. He 
            was sitting on the edge of the bed watching me. 
                 "Soda..."--- my voice sounded weak and hoarse--- "is somebody sick?" 
                 "Yeah." His voice was oddly gentle "Go back to sleep now." 
                 An idea was slowly dawning on me. "Am I sick?" 
                 He stroked my hair. "Yeah, you're sick. Now be quiet." 
                 I had one more question. I was still kind of mixed up. "Is Darry sorry I'm sick?" I 
            had a funny feeling that Darry was sad because I was sick. Everything seemed vague and 
            hazy. 
                 Soda gave me a funny look. He was quiet for a moment. "Yeah, he's sorry you're 
            sick. Now please shut up, will ya, honey? Go back to sleep." 
                 I closed my eyes. I was awful tired. 
                   
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              132  	
                 WHEN I WOKE UP NEXT, it was daylight and I was hot under all the blankets 
            on me. I was thirsty and hungry, but my stomach was so uneasy I knew I wouldn't be able 
            to hold anything down. Darry had pulled the armchair into the bedroom and was asleep in 
            it. He should be at work, I thought. Why is he asleep in the armchair? 
                 "Hey, Darry," I said softly, shaking his knee. "Hey, Darry, wake up." 
                 He opened his eyes. "Ponyboy, you okay?" 
                 "Yeah," I said, "I think so." 
                 Something had happened... but I still couldn't remember it, although I was 
            thinking a lot clearer than I was the last time I'd waked up. 
                 He sighed in relief and pushed my hair back. "Gosh, kid, you had us scared to 
            death." 
                 "What was the matter with me?" 
                 He shook his head. "I told you you were in no condition for a rumble. Exhaustion, 
            shock, minor concussion--- and Two-Bit came blubberin' over here with some tale about 
            how you were running a fever before the rumble and how it was all his fault you were 
            sick. He was pretty torn up that night," Darry said. He was quiet for a minute. "We all 
            were." 
                 And then I remembered. Dallas and Johnny were dead. Don't think of them, I 
            thought. (Don't remember how Johnny was your buddy, don't remember that he didn't 
            want to die. Don't think of Dally breaking up in the hospital, crumpling under the street 
            light. Try to think that Johnny is better off now, try to remember that Dally would have 
            ended up like that sooner or later. Best of all, don't think. Blank your mind. Don't 
            remember. Don't remember.) 
                 "Where'd I get a concussion?" I said. My head itched, but I couldn't scratch it for 
            the bandage. "How long have I been asleep?" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              133  	
                 "You got a concussion from getting kicked in the head--- Soda saw it. He landed 
            all over that Soc. I've never seen him so mad. I think he could have whipped anyone, in 
            the state he was in. Today's Tuesday, and you've been asleep and delirious since Saturday 
            night. Don't you remember?" 
                 "No," I said slowly. "Darry, I'm not ever going to be able to make up the school 
            I've missed. And I've still got to go to court and talk to the police about Bob's getting 
            killed. And now... with Dally..." ---I took a deep breath--- "Darry, do you think they'll 
            split us up? Put me in a home or something?" 
                 He was silent. "I don't know, baby. I just don't know." 
                 I stared at the ceiling. What would it be like, I wondered, staring at a different 
            ceiling? What would it be like in a different bed, in a different room? There was a hard 
            painful lump in my throat that I couldn't swallow. 
                 "Don't you even remember being in the hospital?" Darry asked. He was trying to 
            change the subject. 
                 I shook my head. "I don't remember." 
                 "You kept asking for me and Soda. Sometimes for Mom and Dad, too. But mostly 
            for Soda." 
                 Something in his tone of voice made me look at him. Mostly for Soda. Did I ask 
            for Darry at all, or was he just saying that? 
                 "Darry..." I didn't know quite what I wanted to say. But I had a sick feeling that 
            maybe I hadn't called for him while I was delirious, maybe I had only wanted Sodapop to 
            be with me. What all had I said while I was sick? I couldn't remember. I didn't want to 
            remember. 
                 "Johnny left you his copy of Gone with the Wind. Told the nurse he wanted you 
            to have it" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              134  	
                 I looked at the paperback lying on the table. I didn't want to finish it. I'd never get 
            past the part where the Southern gentlemen go riding into sure death because they are 
            gallant. Southern gentlemen with big black eyes in blue jeans and T-shirts, Southern 
            gentlemen crumpling under street lights. Don't remember. Don't try to decide which one 
            died gallant. Don't remember. 
                 "Where's Soda?" I asked, and then I could have kicked myself. Why can't you talk 
            to Darry, you idiot? I said to myself. Why do you feel uncomfortable talking to Darry? 
                 "Asleep, I hope. I thought he was going to go to sleep shaving this morning and 
            cut his throat. I had to push him to bed, but he was out like a light in a second." 
                 Darry's hopes that Soda was asleep were immediately ruined, because he came 
            running in, clad only in a pair of blue jeans. 
                 "Hey, Ponyboy!" he yelped, and leaped for me, but Darry caught him. 
                 "No rough stuff, little buddy." 
                 So Soda had to content himself with bouncing up and down on the bed and 
            pounding on my shoulder. 
                 "Gosh, but you were sick. You feel okay now?" 
                 "I'm okay. Just a little hungry." 
                 "I should think you would be," Darry said. "You wouldn't eat anything most of 
            the time you were sick. How'd you like some mushroom soup?" 
                 I suddenly realized just how empty I was. "Man, I'd like that just fine." 
                 "I'll go make some. Sodapop, take it easy with him, okay?" 
                 Soda looked back at him indignantly. "You'd think I was going to challenge him 
            to a track meet or something right off the bat." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              135  	
                 "Oh, no," I groaned. "Track meet. I guess this just about puts me out of every 
            race. I won't be back in condition for the meets. And the coach was counting on me." 
                 "Golly, there's always next year," Soda said. Soda never has grasped the 
            importance Darry and I put on athletics. Like he never has understood why we went all-
            out for studying. "Don't sweat it about some track meet." 
                 "Soda," I said suddenly. "What all did I say while I was delirious?" 
                 "Oh, you thought you were in Windrixville most of the time. Then you kept 
            saying that Johnny didn't mean to kill that Soc. Hey, I didn't know you didn't like 
            baloney." 
                 I went cold. "I don't like it. I never liked it" 
                 Soda just looked at me. "You used to eat it. That's why you wouldn't eat anything 
            while you were sick. You kept saying you didn't like baloney, no matter what it was we 
            were trying to get you to eat." 
                 "I don't like it," I repeated. "Soda, did I ask for Darry while I was sick?" 
                 "Yeah, sure," he said, looking at me strangely. "You asked for him and me both. 
            Sometimes Mom and Dad. And for Johnny." 
                 "Oh. I thought maybe I didn't ask for Darry. It was bugging me." 
                 Soda grinned. "Well, you did, so don't worry. We stayed with you so much that 
            the doctor told us we were going to end up in the hospital ourselves if we didn't get some 
            sleep. But we didn't get any anyway." 
                 I took a good look at him. He looked completely worn out; there were circles 
            under his eyes and he had a tense, tired look to him. Yet his dark eyes were still laughing 
            and carefree and reckless. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              136  	
                 "You look beat," I said frankly. "I bet you ain't had three hours sleep since 
            Saturday night." 
                 He grinned but didn't deny it. "Scoot over." He crawled over me and flopped 
            down and before Darry came back in with the soup we were both asleep. 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              137  	
                                  Chapter 11 
                 I HAD TO STAY IN BED a whole week after that. That bugged me; I'm not the 
            kind that can lie around looking at the ceiling all the time. I read most of the time, and 
            drew pictures. One day I started flipping through one of Soda's old yearbooks and came 
            across a picture that seemed vaguely familiar. Not even when I read the name Robert 
            Sheldon did it hit me who it was. And then I finally realized it was Bob. I took a real 
            good long look at it. 
                 The picture didn't look a whole lot like the Bob I remembered, but nobody ever 
            looks a whole lot like his picture in a yearbook anyway. He had been a sophomore that 
            year--- that would make him about eighteen when he died. Yeah, he was good-looking 
            even then, with a grin that reminded me of Soda's, a kind of reckless grin. He had been a 
            handsome black-haired boy with dark eyes--- maybe brown, like Soda's, maybe dark-
            blue, like the Shepard boys'. Maybe he'd had black eyes. Like Johnny. I had never given 
            Bob much thought--- I hadn't had time to think. But that day I wondered about him. What 
            was he like? 
                 I knew he liked to pick fights, had the usual Soc belief that living on the West 
            Side made you Mr. Super-Tuff, looked good in dark wine-colored sweaters, and was 
            proud of his rings. But what about the Bob Sheldon that Cherry Valance knew? She was 
            a smart girl; she didn't like him just because he was good-looking. Sweet and friendly, 
            stands out from the crowd--- that's what she had said. A real person, the best buddy a guy 
            ever had, kept trying to make somebody stop him--- Randy had told me that. Did he have 
            a kid brother who idolized him? Maybe a big brother who kept bugging him not to be so 
            wild? His parents let him run wild--- because they loved him too much or too little? Did 
            they hate us now? I hoped they hated us, that they weren't full of that pity-the-victims-of-
            environment junk the social workers kept handing Curly Shepard every time he got sent 
            off to reform school. I'd rather have anybody's hate than their pity. But, then, maybe they 
            understood, like Cherry Valance. I looked at Bob's picture and I could begin to see the 
            person we had killed. A reckless, hot-tempered boy, cocky and scared stiff at the same 
            time. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              138  	
                 "Ponyboy." 
                 "Yeah?" I didn't look up. I thought it was the doctor. He'd been coming over to 
            see me almost every day, although he didn't do much except talk to me. 
                 "There's a guy here to see you. Says he knows you." Something in Darry's voice 
            made me look up, and his eyes were hard. "His name's Randy." 
                 "Yeah, I know him," I said. 
                 "You want to see him?" 
                 "Yeah." I shrugged. "Sure, why not?" 
                 A few guys from school had dropped by to see me; I have quite a few friends at 
            school even if I am younger than most of them and don't talk much. But that's what they 
            are--- school friends, not buddies. I had been glad to see them, but it bothered me because 
            we live in kind of a lousy neighborhood and our house isn't real great. It's run-down 
            looking and everything, and the inside's kind of poor-looking, too, even though for a 
            bunch of boys we do a pretty good job of house-cleaning. Most of my friends at school 
            come from good homes, not filthy rich like the Socs, but middle class, anyway. It was a 
            funny thing--- it bugged me about my friends seeing our house. But I couldn't have cared 
            less about what Randy thought. 
                 "Hi, Ponyboy." Randy looked uncomfortable standing in the doorway. 
                 "Hi, Randy," I said. "Have a seat if you can find one." Books were lying all over 
            everything. He pushed a couple off a chair and sat down. 
                 "How you feeling? Cherry told me your name was on the school bulletin." 
                 "I'm okay. You can't really miss my name on any kind of bulletin." 
                 He still looked uncomfortable, although he tried to grin. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              139  	
                 "Wanna smoke?" I offered him a weed, but he shook his head. "No, thanks. Uh, 
            Ponyboy, one reason I came here was to see if you were okay, but you--- we--- got to go 
            see the judge tomorrow." 
                 "Yeah," I said, lighting a cigarette. "I know. Hey, holler if you see one of my 
            brothers coming. I'll catch it for smoking in bed." 
                 "My dad says for me to tell the truth and nobody can get hurt. He's kind of upset 
            about all this. I mean, my dad's a good guy and everything, better than most, and I kind of 
            let him down, being mixed up in all this." 
                 I just looked at him. That was the dumbest remark I ever heard anyone make. He 
            thought he was mixed up in this? He didn't kill anyone, he didn't get his head busted in a 
            rumble, it wasn't his buddy that was shot down under a street light. Besides, what did he 
            have to lose? His old man was rich, he could pay whatever fine there was for being drunk 
            and picking a fight. 
                 "I wouldn't mind getting fined," Randy said, "but I feel lousy about the old man. 
            And it's the first time I've felt anything in a long time." 
                 The only thing I'd felt in a long time was being scared. Scared stiff. I'd put off 
            thinking about the judge and the hearing for as long as I could. Soda and Darry didn't like 
            to talk about it either, so we were all silently counting off the days while I was sick, 
            counting the days that we had left together. But with Randy sticking solidly to the subject 
            it was impossible to think about anything else. My cigarette started trembling. 
                 "I guess your folks feel kind of awful about it, too." 
                 "My parents are dead. I live here with just Darry and Soda, my brothers." I took a 
            long drag on my cigarette. "That's what's worrying me. If the judge decides Darry isn't a 
            good guardian or something, I'm liable to get stuck in a home somewhere. That's the 
            rotten part of this deal. Darry is a good guardian; he makes me study and knows where I 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              140  	
            am and who I'm with all the time. I mean, we don't get along so great sometimes, but he 
            keeps me out of trouble, or did. My father didn't yell at me as much as he does." 
                 "I didn't know that" Randy looked worried, he really did. A Soc, even, worried 
            because some kid greaser was on his way to a foster home or something. That was really 
            funny. I don't mean funny. You know what I mean. 
                 "Listen to me, Pony. You didn't do anything. It was your friend Johnny that had 
            the knife..." 
                 "I had it" I stopped him. He was looking at me strangely. "I had the knife. I killed 
            Bob." 
                 Randy shook his head. "I saw it. You were almost drowned. It was the black-
            headed guy that had the switchblade. Bob scared him into doing it. I saw it." 
                 I was bewildered. "I killed him. I had a switchblade and I was scared they were 
            going to beat me up." 
                 "No, kid, it was your friend, the one who died in the hospital..." 
                 "Johnny is not dead." My voice was shaking. "Johnny is not dead." 
                 "Hey, Randy" Darry stuck his head in the door. "I think you'd better go now." 
                 "Sure," Randy said. He was still looking at me kind of funny. "See you around, 
            Pony." 
                 "Don't ever say anything to him about Johnny," I heard Darry say in a low voice 
            as they went out. "He's still pretty racked up mentally and emotionally. The doc said he'd 
            get over it if we gave him time." 
                 I swallowed hard and blinked. He was just like all the rest of the Socs. Cold-
            blooded mean. Johnny didn't have anything to do with Bob's getting killed. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              141  	
                 "Ponyboy Curtis, put out that cigarette!" 
                 "Okay, okay." I put it out. "I ain't going to go to sleep smoking, Darry. If you 
            make me stay in bed there ain't anywhere else I can smoke." 
                 "You're not going to die if you don't get a smoke. But if that bed catches on fire 
            you will. You couldn't make it to the door through that mess." 
                 "Well, golly, I can't pick it up and Soda doesn't, so I guess that leaves you." 
                 He was giving me one of those looks. "All right, all right," I said, "that don't leave 
            you. Maybe Soda'll straighten it up a little." 
                 "Maybe you can be a little neater, huh, little buddy?" 
                 He'd never called me that before. Soda was the only one he ever called "little 
            buddy." 
                 "Sure," I said, "I'll be more careful." 
                                      
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              142  	
                                  Chapter 12 
                 THE HEARING WASN'T anything like I thought it would be. Besides Darry and 
            Soda and me, nobody was there except Randy and his parents and Cherry Valance and 
            her parents and a couple of the other guys that had jumped Johnny and me that night. I 
            don't know what I expected the whole thing to be like--- I guess I've been watching too 
            many Perry Mason shows. Oh, yeah, the doctor was there and he had a long talk with the 
            judge before the hearing. I didn't know what he had to do with it then, but I do now. 
                 First Randy was questioned. He looked a little nervous, and I wished they'd let 
            him have a cigarette. I wished they'd let me have a cigarette; I was more than a little 
            shaky myself. Darry had told me to keep my mouth shut no matter what Randy and 
            everybody said, that I'd get my turn. All the Socs told the same story and stuck mainly to 
            the truth, except they said Johnny had killed Bob; but I figured I could straighten that 
            point out when I got my turn. Cherry told them what had happened before and after 
            Johnny and I had been jumped--- I think I saw a couple of tears slide down her cheeks, 
            but I'm not sure. Her voice was sure steady even if she was crying. The judge questioned 
            everyone carefully, but nothing real emotional or exciting happened like it does on TV. 
            He asked Darry and Soda a little bit about Dally, I think to check our background and 
            find out what kind of guys we hung out with. Was he a real good buddy of ours? Darry 
            said, "Yes, sir;' looking straight at the judge, not flinching; but Soda looked at me like he 
            was sentencing me to the electric chair before he gave the same answer. I was real proud 
            of both of them. Dally had been one of our gang and we wouldn't desert him. I thought 
            the judge would never get around to questioning me. Man, I was scared almost stiff by 
            the time he did. And you know what? They didn't ask me a thing about Bob's getting 
            killed. All the judge did was ask me if I liked living with Darry, if I liked school, what 
            kind of grades I made, and stuff like that. I couldn't figure it out then, but later I found out 
            what the doctor had been talking to the judge about. I guess I looked as scared as I really 
            was, because the judge grinned at me and told me to quit chewing my fingernails. That's 
            a habit I have. Then he said I was acquitted and the whole case was closed. Just like that. 
            Didn't even give me a chance to talk much. But that didn't bother me a lot. I didn't feel 
            like talking anyway. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              143  	
                 I wish I could say that everything went back to normal, but it didn't. Especially 
            me. I started running into things, like the door, and kept tripping over the coffee table and 
            losing things. I always have been kind of absent-minded, but man, then, I was lucky if I 
            got home from school with the right notebook and with both shoes on. I walked all the 
            way home once in my stocking feet and didn't even notice it until Steve made some 
            bright remark about it. I guess I'd left my shoes in the locker room at school, but I never 
            did find them. And another thing, I quit eating. I used to eat like a horse, but all of a 
            sudden I wasn't hungry. Everything tasted like baloney. I was lousing up my schoolwork, 
            too. I didn't do too badly in math, because Darry checked over my homework in that and 
            usually caught all my mistakes and made me do it again, but in English I really washed 
            out. I used to make A's in English, mostly because my teacher made us do compositions 
            all the time. I mean, I know I don't talk good English (Have you ever seen a hood that 
            did?), but I can write it good when I try. At least, I could before. Now I was lucky to get a 
            D on a composition. 
                 It bothered my English teacher, the way I was goofing up, I mean. He's a real 
            good guy, who makes us think, and you can tell he's interested in you as a person, too. 
            One day he told me to stay in after the rest of the class left. 
                 "Ponyboy, I'd like to talk to you about your grades." 
                 Man, I wished I could beat it out of there. I knew I was flunking out in that class, 
            but golly, I couldn't help it. 
                 "There's not much to talk about, judging from your scores. Pony, I'll give it to you 
            straight. You're failing this class right now, but taking into consideration the 
            circumstances, if you come up with a good semester theme, I'll pass you with a C grade." 
                 "Taking into consideration the circumstances" ---brother, was that ever a way to 
            tell me he knew I was goofing up because I'd been in a lot of trouble. At least that was a 
            roundabout way of putting it. The first week of school after the hearing had been awful. 
            People I knew wouldn't talk to me, and people I didn't know would come right up and ask 
            about the whole mess. Sometimes even teachers. And my history teacher--- she acted as 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              144  	
            if she was scared of me, even though I'd never caused any trouble in her class. You can 
            bet that made me feel real tuff. 
                 "Yessir," I said, "I'll try. What's the theme supposed to be on?" 
                 "Anything you think is important enough to write about. And it isn't a reference 
            theme; I want your own ideas and your own experiences." 
                 My first trip to the zoo. Oh, boy, oh, boy. "Yessir," I said, and got out of there as 
            fast as I could. 
                 At lunch hour I met Two-Bit and Steve out in the back parking lot and we drove 
            over to a little neighborhood grocery store to buy cigarettes and Cokes and candy bars. 
            The store was the grease hang-out and that was about all we ever had for lunch. The Socs 
            were causing a lot of trouble in the school cafeteria--- throwing silverware and stuff--- 
            and everybody tried to blame it on us greasers. We all got a big laugh out of that. 
            Greasers rarely even eat in the cafeteria. 
                 I was sitting on the fender of Steve's car, smoking and drinking a Pepsi while he 
            and Two-Bit were inside talking to some girls, yvhen a car drove up and three Socs got 
            out. I just sat there and looked at them and took another swallow of the Pepsi. I wasn't 
            scared. It was the oddest feeling in the world. I didn't feel anything--- scared, mad, or 
            anything. Just zero. 
                 "You're the guy that killed Bob Sheldon," one of them said. "And he was a friend 
            of ours. We don't like nobody killing our friends, especially greasers." 
                 Big deal. I busted the end off my bottle and held on to the neck and tossed away 
            my cigarette "You get back into your car or you'll get split." 
                 They looked kind of surprised, and one of them backed up. 
                 "I mean it" I hopped off the car. "I've had about all I can take from you guys." I 
            started toward them, holding the bottle the way Tim Shepard holds a switch--- out and 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              145  	
            away from myself, in a loose but firm hold. I guess they knew I meant business, because 
            they got into their car and drove off. 
                 "You really would have used that bottle, wouldn't you?" Two-Bit had been 
            watching from the store doorway. "Steve and me were backing you, but I guess we didn't 
            need to. You'd have really cut them up, huh?" 
                 "I guess so," I said with a sigh. I didn't see what Two-Bit was sweating about--- 
            anyone else could have done the same thing and Two-Bit wouldn't have thought about it 
            twice. 
                 "Ponyboy, listen, don't get tough. You're not like the rest of us and don't try to 
            be..." 
                 What was the matter with Two-Bit? I knew as well as he did that if you got tough 
            you didn't get hurt. Get smart and nothing can touch you... 
                 "What in the world are you doing?" Two-Bit's voice broke into my thoughts. 
                 I looked up at him. "Picking up the glass." 
                 He stared at me for a second, then grinned. "You little sonofagun," he said in a 
            relieved voice. I didn't know what he was talking about, so I just went on picking up the 
            glass from the bottle end and put it in a trash can. I didn't want anyone to get a flat tire. 
                 I tried to write that theme when I got home. I really did, mostly because Darry 
            told me to or else. I thought about writing about Dad, but I couldn't. It's going to be a 
            long time before I can even think about my parents. A long time. I tried writing about 
            Soda's horse, Mickey Mouse, but I couldn't get it right; it always came out sounding 
            corny. So I started writing names across the paper. Darrel Shaynne Curtis, Jr. Soda 
            Patrick Curtis. Ponyboy Michael Curtis. Then I drew horses all over it. That was going to 
            get a good grade like all git-out. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              146  	
                 "Hey, did the mail come in yet?" Soda slammed the door and yelled for the mail, 
            just the way he does every day when he comes home from work. I was in the bedroom, 
            but I knew he would throw his jacket toward the sofa and miss it, take off his shoes, and 
            go into the kitchen for a glass of chocolate milk, because that's what he does every day of 
            his life. He always runs around in his stocking feet--- he doesn't like shoes. 
                 Then he did a funny thing. He came in and flopped down on the bed and started 
            smoking a cigarette. He hardly ever smokes, except when something is really bugging 
            him or when he wants to look tough. And he doesn't have to impress us; we know he's 
            tough. So I figured something was bothering him. "How was work?" 
                 "Okay." 
                 "Something wrong?" 
                 He shook his head. I shrugged and went back to drawing horses. 
                 Soda cooked dinner that night, and everything came out right. That was unusual, 
            because he's always trying something different. One time we had green pancakes. Green. 
            I can tell you one thing: if you've got a brother like Sodapop, you're never bored. 
                 All through supper Soda was quiet, and he didn't eat much. That was really 
            unusual. Most of the time you can't shut him up or fill him up. Darry didn't seem to 
            notice, so I didn't say anything. 
                 Then after supper me and Darry got into a fuss, about the fourth one we'd had that 
            week. This one started because I hadn't done anything on that theme, and I wanted to go 
            for a ride. It used to be that I'd just stand there and let Darry yell at me, but lately I'd been 
            yelling right back. 
                 "What's the sweat about my schoolwork?" I finally shouted. "I'll have to get a job 
            as soon as I get out of school anyway. Look at Soda. He's doing okay, and he dropped 
            out. You can just lay off!" 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              147  	
                 "You're not going to drop out. Listen, with your brains and grades you could get a 
            scholarship, and we could put you through college. But schoolwork's not the point. 
            You're living in a vacuum, Pony, and you're going to have to cut it out. Johnny and 
            Dallas were our buddies, too, but you don't just stop living because you lose someone. I 
            thought you knew that by now. You don't quit! And anytime you don't like the way I'm 
            running things you can get out." 
                 I went tight and cold. We never talked about Dallas or Johnny. "You'd like that, 
            wouldn't you? You'd like me just to get out. Well, it's not that easy, is it, Soda?" But 
            when I looked at Soda I stopped. His face was white, and when he looked at me his eyes 
            were wide with a pained expression. I suddenly remembered Curly Shepard's face when 
            he slipped off a telephone pole and broke his arm. 
                 "Don't... Oh, you guys, why can't you..." He jumped up suddenly and bolted out 
            the door. Darry and I were struck dumb. Darry picked up the envelope that Soda had 
            dropped. 
                 "It's the letter he wrote Sandy," Darry said without expression. "Returned 
            unopened." 
                 So that was what had been bugging Soda all afternoon. And I hadn't even 
            bothered to find out. And while I was thinking about it, I realized that I never had paid 
            much attention to Soda's problems. Darry and I just took it for granted that he didn't have 
            any. 
                 "When Sandy went to Florida... it wasn't Soda, Ponyboy. He told me he loved her, 
            but I guess she didn't love him like he thought she did, because it wasn't him." 
                 "You don't have to draw me a picture," I said. 
                 "He wanted to marry her anyway, but she just left." Darry was looking at me with 
            a puzzled expression. "Why didn't he tell you? I didn't think he'd tell Steve or Two-Bit, 
            but I thought he told you everything." 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              148  	
                 "Maybe he tried," I said. How many times had Soda started to tell me something, 
            only to find I was daydreaming or stuck in a book? He would always listen to me, no 
            matter what he was doing. 
                 "He cried every night that week you were gone," Darry said slowly. "Both you 
            and Sandy in the same week." He put the envelope down. "Come on, let's go after him." 
                 We chased him clear to the park. We were gaining on him, but he had a block's 
            head start. 
                 "Circle around and cut him off," Darry ordered. Even out of condition I was the 
            best runner. "I'll stay right behind him." 
                 I headed through the trees and cut him off halfway across the park. He veered off 
            to the right, but I caught him in a flying tackle before he'd gone more than a couple of 
            steps. It knocked the wind out of both of us. We lay there gasping for a minute or two, 
            and then Soda sat up and brushed the grass off his shirt. 
                 "You should have gone out for football instead of track." 
                 "Where did you think you were going?" I lay flat on my back and looked at him. 
            Darry came up and dropped down beside us. 
                 Soda shrugged. "I don't know. It's just... I can't stand to hear y'all fight. 
            Sometimes... I just have to get out or... it's like I'm the middleman in a tug o' war and I'm 
            being split in half. You dig?" 
                 Darry gave me a startled look. Neither of us had realized what it was doing to 
            Soda to hear us fight. I was sick and cold with shame. What he said was the truth. Darry 
            and I did play tug of war with him, with never a thought to how much it was hurting him. 
                 Soda was fiddling with some dead grass. "I mean, I can't take sides. It'd be a lot 
            easier if I could, but I see both sides. Darry yells too much and tries too hard and takes 
            everything too serious, and Ponyboy, you don't think enough, you don't realize all Darry's 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              149  	
            giving up just to give you a chance he missed out on. He could have stuck you in a home 
            somewhere and worked his way through college. Ponyboy, I'm telling you the truth. I 
            dropped out because I'm dumb. I really did try in school, but you saw my grades. Look, 
            I'm happy working in a gas station with cars. You'd never be happy doing something like 
            that. And Darry, you ought to try to understand him more, and quit bugging him about 
            every little mistake he makes. He feels things differently than you do." He gave us a 
            pleading look. "Golly, you two, it's bad enough having to listen to it, but when you start 
            trying to get me to take sides..." Tears welled up in his eyes. "We're all we've got left. We 
            ought to be able to stick together against everything. If we don't have each other, we don't 
            have anything. If you don't have anything, you end up like Dallas... and I don't mean 
            dead, either. I mean like he was before. And that's worse than dead. Please"--- he wiped 
            his eyes on his arm--- "don't fight anymore." 
                 Darry looked real worried. I suddenly realized that Darry was only twenty, that he 
            wasn't so much older that he couldn't feel scared or hurt and as lost as the rest of us. I saw 
            that I had expected Darry to do all the understanding without even trying to understand 
            him. And he had given up a lot for Soda and me. 
                 "Sure, little buddy," Darry said softly. "We're not going to fight anymore." 
                 "Hey, Ponyboy"--- Soda gave me a tearful grin--- "don't you start crying, too. One 
            bawl-baby in the family's enough." 
                 "I'm not crying," I said. Maybe I was. I don't remember. Soda gave me a playful 
            punch on the shoulder. 
                 "No more fights. Okay, Ponyboy?" Darry said. 
                 "Okay," I said. And I meant it. Darry and I would probably still have 
            misunderstandings--- we were too different not to--- but no more fights. We couldn't do 
            anything to hurt Soda. Sodapop would always be the middleman, but that didn't mean he 
            had to keep getting pulled apart. Instead of Darry and me pulling me apart, he'd be 
            pulling us together. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              150  	
                 "Well," Soda said, "I'm cold. How about going home?" 
                 "Race you," I challenged, leaping up. It was a real nice night for a race. The air 
            was clear and cold and so clean it almost sparkled. The moon wasn't out but the stars lit 
            up everything. It was quiet except for the sound of our feet on the cement and the dry, 
            scraping sound of leaves blowing across the street. It was a real nice night. I guess I was 
            still out of shape, because we all three tied. No. I guess we all just wanted to stay 
            together. 
                 I still didn't want to do my homework that night, though. I hunted around for a 
            book to read, but I'd read everything in the house about fifty million times, even Darry's 
            copy of The Carpetbaggers, though he'd told me I wasn't old enough to read it. I thought 
            so too after I finished it. Finally I picked up Gone with the Wind and looked at it for a 
            long time. I knew Johnny was dead. I had known it all the time, even while I was sick and 
            pretending he wasn't. It was Johnny, not me, who had killed Bob ---I knew that too. I had 
            just thought that maybe if I played like Johnny wasn't dead it wouldn't hurt so much. The 
            way Two-Bit, after the police had taken Dally's body away, had griped because he had 
            lost his switchblade when they searched Dallas, 
                 "Is that all that's bothering you, that switchblade?" a red-eyed Steve had snapped 
            at him. 
                 "No," Two-Bit had said with a quivering sigh, "but that's what I'm wishing was all 
            that's bothering me." 
                 But it still hurt anyway. You know a guy a long time, and I mean really know 
            him, you don't get used to the idea that he's dead just overnight. Johnny was something 
            more than a buddy to all of us. I guess he had listened to more beefs and more problems 
            from more people than any of us. A guy that'll really listen to you, listen and care about 
            what you're saying, is something rare. And I couldn't forget him telling me that he hadn't 
            done enough, hadn't been out of our neighborhood all his life--- and then it was too late. I 
            took a deep breath and opened the book. A slip of paper fell out on the floor and I picked 
            it up. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              151  	
                 Ponyboy, I asked the nurse to give you this book so you could finish it. It was 
            Johnny's handwriting. I went on reading, almost hearing Johnny's quiet voice. The doctor 
            came in a while ago but I knew anyway. I keep getting tireder and tireder. Listen, I don't 
            mind dying now. It's worth it. It's worth saving those kids. Their lives are worth more 
            than mine, they have more to live for. Some of their parents came by to thank me and I 
            know it was worth it. Tell Dally it's worth it. I'm just going to miss you guys. I've been 
            thinking about it, and that poem, that guy that wrote it, he meant you're gold when you're 
            a kid, like green. When you're a kid everything's new, dawn. It's just when you get used 
            to everything that it's day. Like the way you dig sunsets, Pony. That's gold. Keep that 
            way, it's a good way to be. I want you to tell Dally to look at one. He'll probably think 
            you're crazy, but ask for me. I don't think he's ever really seen a sunset. And don't be so 
            bugged over being a greaser. You still have a lot o f time to make yourself be what you 
            want. There's still lots of good in the world. Tell Dally. I don't think he knows. Your 
            buddy, Johnny. 
                 Tell Dally. It was too late to tell Dally. Would he have listened? I doubted it. 
            Suddenly it wasn't only a personal thing to me. I could picture hundreds and hundreds of 
            boys living on the wrong sides of cities, boys with black eyes who jumped at their own 
            shadows. Hundreds of boys who maybe watched sunsets and looked at stars and ached 
            for something better. I could see boys going down under street lights because they were 
            mean and tough and hated the world, and it was too late to tell them that there was still 
            good in it, and they wouldn't believe you if you did. It was too vast a problem to be just a 
            personal thing. There should be some help, someone should tell them before it was too 
            late. Someone should tell their side of the story, and maybe people would understand then 
            and wouldn't be so quick to judge a boy by the amount of hair oil he wore. It was 
            important to me. I picked up the phone book and called my English teacher. 
                 "Mr. Syme, this is Ponyboy. That theme--- how long can it be?" 
                 "Why, uh, not less than five pages." He sounded a little surprised. I'd forgotten it 
            was late at night. 
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              152  	
                 "Can it be longer?" 
                 "Certainly, Ponyboy, as long as you want it." 
                 "Thanks," I said and hung up. 
                 I sat down and picked up my pen and thought for a minute. Remembering. 
            Remembering a handsome, dark boy with a reckless grin and a hot temper. A tough, tow-
            headed boy with a cigarette in his mouth and a bitter grin on his hard face. Remembering-
            -- and this time it didn't hurt--- a quiet, defeated-looking sixteen-year-old whose hair 
            needed cutting badly and who had black eyes with a frightened expression to them. One 
            week had taken all three of them. And I decided I could tell people, beginning with my 
            English teacher. I wondered for a long time how to start that theme, how to start writing 
            about something that was important to me. And I finally began like this: When I stepped 
            out into the bright sunlight from the darkness of the movie house, I had only two things 
            on my mind: Paul Newman and a ride home... 
                  
                  
            The  	Outsiders,  	S.E.  	Hinton  	              153  	
