                                                                 
                                                     1.  INTRODUCTION 
                   1.  This  policy  paper  sets  out  the  considerations  which  guide  the  exercise  of 
                   prosecutorial  discretion  in  the  selection  and  prioritisation  of  cases  for 
                   investigation and prosecution. It describes the policy and practice of the Office of 
                   the  Prosecutor  (“Office”)  in  relation  to  the  process  of  choosing  the  incidents, 
                   persons and conduct to be investigated and prosecuted within a given situation 
                   and of prioritising cases both within a situation and across different situations. 
                   The  paper  is  based  on,  inter  alia,  the  Rome  Statute  (“Statute”),  the  Rules  of 
                   Procedure and Evidence, the Regulations of the Court, the Regulations of the 
                   Office, the prosecutorial strategy and other policy documents of the Office, as 
                   well as the experience of the Office over its first decade of activities. It also draws 
                   from  the  jurisprudence  of  the  International  Criminal  Court  (“Court”),  and 
                   international and national practice in this field.1 
                    
                   2.  This is an internal document of the Office and as such, it does not give rise to 
                   legal  rights,  and  is  subject  to  revision  based  on  experience  and  in  light  of 
                   evolving jurisprudence and/or any relevant amendments to the legal texts of the 
                   Court. 
                    
                   3.  The paper is made public in accordance with the practice of the Office to 
                   ensure clarity and transparency in the manner in which it applies the requisite 
                   legal  criteria  and  exercises  its  prosecutorial  discretion  in  accordance  with  its 
                   mandate under the Statute. 
                    
                   4.  The jurisprudence of the Court distinguishes between “situations”, which are 
                   generally defined in terms of temporal, territorial and in some cases personal 
                   parameters,  and  “cases”,  which  comprise  specific  incidents  within  a  given 
                   “situation” during which one or more crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court 
                                                 2
                   may have been committed,  and whose scope are defined by the suspect under 
                   investigation  and  the  conduct  that  gives  rise  to  criminal  liability  under  the 
                           3                                                                    4
                   Statute.  While the Office’s Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations  addresses 
                                                                    
                   1 See ICC-ASP/14/Res.4, para. 35. 
                   2 Situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, “Decision on the applications for participation in the 
                   proceedings of VPRS 1, VPRS 2, VPRS 3, VPRS 4, VPRS 5 and VPRS 6”, ICC-01/04-101-tEN-Corr, 17 
                   January 2006, para. 65. See also The Prosecutor v. Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, “Decision concerning Pre-Trial 
                   Chamber’s Decision of 10 February 2006 and the Incorporation of Documents into the Record of the Case 
                   against Mr Thomas Lubanga Dyilo”, ICC-01/04-01/06-8-Corr (Annex I), 24 February 2006, para. 21.  
                   3 The Appeals Chamber has held that “the ‘conduct’ that defines the ‘case’ is both that of the suspect […] 
                   and  that  described  in  the  incidents  under  investigation  which  is  imputed  to  the  suspect.  ‘Incident’  is 
                   understood as referring to a historical event, defined in time and place, in the course of which crimes within 
                   the jurisdiction of the Court were allegedly committed by one or more direct perpetrators”: The Prosecutor 
                                                                3 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                               
                   the process for the opening of investigations into situations as a whole, this paper 
                   addresses how cases are selected and prioritised. Given their close correlation, 
                   the present policy paper draws from many of the same principles and criteria 
                   that are applied at the preliminary examination stage.  
                           
                   5.  In  the  discharge  of  its  mandate,  the  Office  exercises  its  discretion  in 
                   determining which cases should be selected and prioritised for investigation and 
                   prosecution.5 The purpose of this paper is to ensure that the exercise of such 
                   discretion in all instances is guided by sound, fair and transparent principles and 
                   criteria.  It  is  not  the  responsibility  or  role  of  the  Office  to  investigate  and 
                   prosecute each and every alleged criminal act within a given situation or every 
                   person  allegedly  responsible  for  such  crimes.  This  would  be  both  practically 
                   unfeasible  and  run  counter  to  the  notion  of  complementary  action  at  the 
                   international and national level, as highlighted in the preamble6 and article 1 of 
                   the Statute.   
                           
                   6.  Gravity is the predominant case selection criteria adopted by the Office and is 
                   embedded also into considerations of both the degree of responsibility of alleged 
                   perpetrators and charging.  
                           
                   7.  In relation to cases not selected for investigation or prosecution, it should be 
                   recalled  that  the  goal  of  the  Statute  to  combat  impunity  and  prevent  the 
                   recurrence  of  violence,  as  expressed  in  its  preamble,  is  to  be  achieved  by 
                   combining  the  activities  of  the  Court  and  national  jurisdictions  within  a 
                   complementary system of criminal justice.7 As such, the Office will continue to 
                                                                                                      8
                   encourage genuine national proceedings by relevant States with jurisdiction.  In 
                   particular,  it  will  seek  to  cooperate  with  States  who  are  investigating  and 
                   prosecuting individuals who have committed or have facilitated the commission 
                                                                                                                                                                    
                   v. Saif al-Islam Gaddafi and Abdullah al-Senussi, Judgment on the appeal of Libya against the decision of 
                   Pre-Trial Chamber I of 31 May 2013 entitled ‘Decision on the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-
                   Islam Gaddafi’”, ICC-01/11-01/11-547-Red OA4, 21 May 2014, paras. 1, 62. 
                   4 Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations, ICC-OTP, November 2013. 
                   5 The Prosecutor’s discretion is reflected, inter alia, in articles 14(1), 42(1) and 58(1) of the Statute.  
                   6  Preamble,  paras.  4  and  10,  Statute;  see  also  Paper  on  some  policy  issues  before  the  Office  of  the 
                   Prosecutor, ICC-OTP, September 2003. 
                   7  In  particular,  the  preamble  of  the  Statute  affirms  that  “the  most  serious  crimes  of  concern  to  the 
                   international community as a whole must not go unpunished and that their effective prosecution must be 
                   ensured by taking measures at the national level and by enhancing international cooperation”; expresses a 
                   determination “to put an end to impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes and thus to contribute to the 
                   prevention of such crimes”; recalls “the duty of every State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those 
                   responsible for international crimes”; and emphasises that the ICC “shall be complementary to national 
                   criminal jurisdictions”. 
                   8 Paper on some policy issues before the Office of the Prosecutor, ICC-OTP September 2003. 
                                                              4 
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                 
                                               9
                   of  Rome  Statute  crimes.   The  Office  will  also  seek  to  cooperate  and  provide 
                   assistance to States, upon request, with respect to conduct which constitutes a 
                   serious  crime  under  national  law,  such  as  the  illegal  exploitation  of  natural 
                   resources, arms trafficking, human trafficking, terrorism, financial crimes, land 
                                                                       10
                   grabbing or the destruction of the environment.  Finally, the Office recalls that it 
                   fully  endorses  the  role  that  can  be  played  by  truth  seeking  mechanisms, 
                   reparations programs, institutional reform and traditional justice mechanisms as 
                                                                 11
                   part of a broader comprehensive strategy.  
                           
                   8.  The overall aim of the Office is be to represent as much as possible the true 
                   extent of the criminality which has occurred within a given situation, in an effort 
                   to ensure, jointly with the relevant national jurisdictions, that the most serious 
                   crimes committed in each situation do not go unpunished. 
                           
                   9.  As noted in the Office’s Policy Paper on Victims’ Participation, the Office 
                   promotes direct interaction with victims and victims’ associations at all stages of 
                   its  activities  and  on  an  ongoing  basis  from  the  preliminary  examination, 
                                                                        12
                   investigation, pre-trial, trial to reparation stages.   
                    
                    
                                             2.  CASE SELECTION DOCUMENT 
                   10. The Office will develop a Case Selection Document which identifies in broad 
                   terms the potential cases across all situations. As each new situation is opened 
                   for  investigation,  the  Office  will  include  the  potential  cases  arising  from  that 
                   situation  into  the  Case  Selection  Document.  Initially,  the  Case  Selection 
                   Document will be based on the conclusions from the preliminary examination 
                   stage, including the potential cases identified therein.13 As investigations within 
                   each situation proceed, and bearing in mind the Office’s strategy to conduct in-
                   depth and open-ended investigations, the Office will gradually develop one or 
                   more provisional case hypotheses that meet the criteria set out in this policy 
                                                                    
                   9 Strategic Plan, 2016-2018, ICC-OTP, 16 November 2015, paras. 92-98. 
                   10 See article 93(10) of the Statute. 
                   11 Policy Paper on the Interests of Justice, ICC-OTP 2007, p. 7. 
                   12 Information can be sent to: ICC Office of the Prosecutor, Communications, Post Office Box 19519, 2500 
                   CM The Hague, The Netherlands; by email to otp.informationdesk@icc‐cpi.int, or by fax to +31 70 515 
                   8555. Policy Paper on Victims’ Participation, ICC-OTP, April 2010, p. 1. 
                   13 Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations, ICC-OTP, November 2013, para. 43. 
                                                                5 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                
                   paper.  The  Case  Selection  Document  is  a  dynamic  document  that  will  be 
                   reviewed and updated accordingly.14  
                    
                   11. The  Office  will  select  cases  for  investigation  and  prosecution  among  the 
                   provisional  case  hypotheses  identified  in  the  Case  Selection  Document. 
                   Considering that there will normally be numerous cases that meet these criteria 
                   within any one situation or across several different situations, the Case Selection 
                   Document will also be used to prioritise cases both within a given situation and 
                   across situations to manage the overall workload of the Office in the light of its 
                   overall basic size and capacity constraints.15  
                           
                   12. Given that the resources available to the Office limit the number of cases it 
                   can investigate and prosecute at any one time, the Case Selection Document will 
                   also inform decisions on the appropriate number of cases to be pursued within 
                   any given situation, whether to proceed with further cases, or whether to end its 
                   involvement in a situation.16  
                           
                   13. Case selection and prioritisation will require regular updating on the basis of 
                   the information and evidence obtained during the course of investigations, any 
                   ongoing criminality, as well as the evolution of operational conditions that could 
                   impact the Office’s ability to conduct successful investigations and prosecutions. 
                   As part of this process, not only could a selection or prioritisation decision need 
                   to be revisited over time, the case hypothesis itself may need to be adjusted to 
                   take into account the evidence that has been collected.17 As such, case selection 
                   and  prioritisation,  as  well  as  the  preparation  of  the  overall  Case  Selection 
                   Document, should be considered a dynamic process that seeks to continually 
                   refine  the  focus  of  the  Office’s  investigations  until  such  time  as  an  article  58 
                   application is made.  
                           
                                                                    
                   14 See regulations 33 and 34 of the Regulations of the Office of the Prosecutor. See also Strategic Plan, 
                   2016-2018, ICC-OTP, 16 November 2015, para.34: the open-ended aspect of the investigations means that 
                   the Office first identifies alleged crimes (or incidents) to be investigated within a wide range of incidents. 
                   Following this meticulous process, alleged perpetrators are identified based on the evidence collected. This 
                   approach  implies  the  need  to  consider  multiple  alternative  case  hypotheses  and  to  consistently  and 
                   objectively  test  case  theories  against  the  evidence  –  incriminating  and  exonerating  –  and  to  support 
                   decision-making in relation to investigations and prosecutions.   
                   15 The report of the Court on the Basic Size of the Office of the Prosecutor, ICC-ASP/14/21, 17 September 
                   2015. 
                   16 The criteria to be applied and the procedures to be followed for ending the Office’s involvement in a 
                   given situation will be the subject of a separate policy paper.  
                   17 See regulation 35(4) of the Regulations of the Office of the Prosecutor. See also paras. 51, 53 below. 
                                                               6 
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                   14. At least once a year, the Office will review the Case Selection Document with 
                   a  view  to  revisiting  its  decisions  regarding  selection  and  prioritisation  and 
                   adjusting  the  Case  Selection  Document  in  accordance  with  the  level  of 
                   information  and  evidence  available  and  current  operational  conditions,  as 
                   necessary. 
                           
                   15. The Case Selection Document, due to its very nature, will remain confidential. 
                   However, once a person has been arrested or appeared voluntarily before the 
                   Court,  the  Office  will  include  as  part  of  its  public  information  activities  its 
                   rationale for bringing forward the case for prosecution in the light of this policy 
                   paper. 
                    
                           
                                                 3.  GENERAL PRINCIPLES  
                   16. The Office shall conduct its case selection and prioritisation on the basis of the 
                   overarching principles of independence, impartiality and objectivity.  
                    
                                                        a)  Independence 
                   17. Article 42 of the Statute provides that the Office of the Prosecutor shall act 
                                                                                  18
                   independently  of  instructions  from  any  external  source.   Independence  goes 
                   beyond not seeking or acting on instructions: it means that decisions shall not be 
                   influenced or altered by the presumed or known wishes of any external actor.  
                    
                   18. Where information is provided to the Office by a State Party in accordance 
                   with article 14(2), by the United Nations Security Council (“UNSC”), or from 
                   individual  communications  under  article  15,  the  Office  is  not  bound  or 
                   constrained by the information contained therein for the purpose of determining 
                                                                                                    19
                   whether specific incidents or persons should be investigated or prosecuted.   
                    
                                                                    
                   18  See  also  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Office  of  the  Prosecutor,  5  September  2013  (OTP2013/024322), 
                   Chapter 2, Section 2. 
                   19 Thus, for example, while article 14(2) of the Statute invites a referring State Party to specify as far as 
                   possible  all  relevant  circumstances  and  provide  available  supporting  documentation,  article  14(1) 
                   emphasises that it is for the Prosecutor to determine whether one or more specific persons should be 
                   charged with the commission of crimes.  
                                                               7 
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                 
                                                           b)  Impartiality 
                   19. The principle of impartiality, which flows from articles 21(3) and 42(7) of the 
                           20
                   Statute,   means  that  the  Office  will  apply  consistent  methods  and  criteria 
                   irrespective  of  the  States  or  parties  involved  or  the  person(s)  or  group(s) 
                   concerned. No adverse distinction may be made on grounds prohibited under 
                   the Statute. In particular, the Office shall apply its methods and criteria equally 
                   to  all  persons  without  any  distinction  based  on  official  capacity  pursuant  to 
                   article 27(1) or other grounds referred to in article 21(3).   
                    
                   20. The  Office  will  examine  allegations  against  all  groups  or  parties  within  a 
                   particular  situation  to  assess  whether  persons  belonging  to  those  groups  or 
                   parties  bear  criminal  responsibility  under  the  Statute.  However,  impartiality 
                   does not mean “equivalence of blame” within a situation. It means that the Office 
                   will apply the same processes, methods, criteria and thresholds for members of 
                   all  groups  to  determine  whether  the  crimes  allegedly  committed  by  them 
                   warrant  investigation  and  prosecution.  This  may  in  fact  lead  to  different 
                   outcomes  for  different  groups.  Cases  against  specific  persons  will  only  be 
                   brought if they meet the case selection and prioritisation criteria identified in this 
                   policy paper. Accordingly, the Office will not seek to create the appearance of 
                   parity within a situation between rival parties by selecting cases that would not 
                   otherwise meet the criteria set out herein. 
                    
                                                           c)  Objectivity 
                   21. Case selection is an information and evidence-driven process. This means that 
                   the  Office  will  select  and  pursue  cases  only  if  the  information  and  evidence 
                   available  or  accessible  to  the  Prosecution,  including  upon  investigation,  can 
                   reasonably justify the selection of a case.  
                    
                   22. As part of the case selection process, the Office will balance the strength of a 
                   case theory against its weaknesses. Pursuant to its duty under article 54(1)(a) of 
                   the Statute to “investigate incriminating and exonerating circumstances equally” 
                   in  order  to  “establish  the  truth”  and  regulations  34(1)  and  35(4)  of  the 
                   Regulations  of  the  Office,  any  provisional  case  hypothesis  will  include  both 
                   incriminating  and  potentially  exonerating  circumstances.  The  case  hypothesis 
                   will be reviewed on a continuous basis taking into consideration the evidence 
                   collected.  Both  incriminating  and  exonerating  evidence  will  be  fairly  and 
                                                                    
                   20  See  also  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Office  of  the  Prosecutor,  5  September  2013  (OTP2013/024322), 
                   Chapter 2, Section 6. 
                                                                8 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                   objectively evaluated and the case hypothesis may be adjusted or rejected on the 
                   basis of further investigations.  
                    
                   23. The Office will follow a standard analytical methodology, including methods 
                   for ongoing source evaluation and using consistent rules of measurement and 
                   attribution  in  its  crime  pattern  analysis.  At  various  stages  in  the  process  of 
                   investigating and prosecuting a case (particularly before applying for an arrest 
                   warrant or a summons to appear and before submitting a Document Containing 
                   the Charges), the Office will conduct a comprehensive evidence review involving 
                   Office  staff  external  to  the  team  to  whom  an  investigation  or  prosecution  is 
                   assigned, to scrutinise the sufficiency of the evidence for the relevant stage of the 
                   proceedings  and  to  assess  whether  the  Office  can  conduct  an  effective  and 
                   successful investigation leading to a prosecution with a reasonable prospect of 
                   conviction.   
                    
                    
                                                     4.  LEGAL CRITERIA 
                   24. The Office shall ensure that cases selected for investigation and prosecution 
                   fall within the jurisdiction of the Court; that they would be admissible in terms of 
                   complementarity and gravity; and, as a matter of policy, that they would not be 
                   contrary  to  the  interests  of  justice.  However,  the  selection  of  cases  for 
                   investigation within an existing situation should not be confused with decisions 
                   to  initiate  an  investigation  into  a  situation  as  a  whole  within  the  meaning  of 
                   article 53(1) and rule 48.  
                    
                   25. The factors that the Office considers in relation to these legal criteria are set 
                                                                                         21
                   out in the Office’s Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations.  The Office will 
                   apply these factors mutatis mutandis at the case selection stage. Nonetheless, by 
                   its nature, case selection requires the application of a more focused test than the 
                   one conducted at the situation stage. For each case selected for investigation and 
                   prosecution,  jurisdiction,  admissibility  and  the  interests  of  justice  will  be 
                   considered in relation to identified incidents, persons and conduct.  
                    
                                                           a)  Jurisdiction 
                   26. In accordance with article 58(1)(a) of the Statute, the Office must determine 
                   whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person concerned has 
                   committed  a  crime  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Court.  At  the  same  time, 
                                                                    
                   21 Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations, ICC-OTP, November 2013, paras. 34-71. 
                                                                9 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                   pursuant to article 19, a case must fall within the scope of, or be sufficiently 
                   linked  to,  a  situation  that  has  been  referred  by  a  State  Party  or  the  Security 
                   Council  or  which  has  otherwise  been  authorised  by  the  Pre-Trial  Chamber.  
                   Crimes committed after the date of a referral or an authorisation decision will 
                   continue to fall within the jurisdiction of the Court if they are sufficiently linked 
                   to the particular situation.22 
                    
                   27. In  accordance  with  article  12(2)  of  the  Statute,  the  exercise  of  the  Court’s 
                   jurisdiction  over  individuals  may  be  based  on  the  principles  of  territory  or 
                   nationality. Where the Office proceeds on the basis of territorial jurisdiction, it 
                   can  investigate  all  alleged  crimes  occurring  in  a  particular  territory  or  State, 
                   irrespective of whether the individual concerned is a national of a State Party or a 
                   non-State Party. Where jurisdiction is based solely on nationality, the Office can 
                   investigate crimes allegedly committed by nationals of a State Party or of a State 
                   which has accepted the exercise of jurisdiction by the Court under article 12(3), 
                   even if that conduct has occurred on the territory of a State not party to the 
                   Statute. In the latter case, the Office will consider investigating such a person if 
                   he or she falls within the scope of the Prosecution’s strategy for case selection 
                   and prioritisation  as  set  out  in  this  paper.  In  this  regard,  the  Office  will  not 
                   consider  as  a  bar  to  the  exercise  of  criminal  jurisdiction  the  fact  that  a  dual 
                   national falls within the personal jurisdiction of the Court under one nationality, 
                   but not the other.  
                    
                   28. The referral of a situation by the UNSC under Chapter VII of the UN Charter 
                   concerning any UN Member State will enable the Court to exercise jurisdiction in 
                   relation to a situation irrespective of the territorial or nationality limitations set 
                   out  in  article  12,  although  it  cannot  exceed  the  temporal  or  subject-matter 
                   parameters of the Court’s jurisdiction as contained in articles 5 and 11. The entire 
                   legal framework of the Statute is applicable to situations referred by the UNSC, 
                   including its complementarity and cooperation regimes.23 
                    
                                                                    
                   22 The Prosecutor v. Callixte Mbarushimana, “Decision on the ‘Defence Challenge to the Jurisdiction of 
                   the  Court’”,  ICC-01/04-01/10-451,  26  October  2011,  paras.  21,  27;  Situation  in  the  Republic  of  Cote 
                   d'Ivoire, “Corrigendum to ‘Decision Pursuant to Article 15 of the Rome Statute on the Authorisation of an 
                   Investigation into the Situation in the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire’”, ICC-02/11-14-Corr, 15 November 2011, 
                   paras.  178-179;  Situation  in  Georgia,  “Decision  on  the  Prosecutor’s  request  for  authorization  of  an 
                   investigation” ICC-01/15-12, 27 January 2016, para. 64. 
                   23 The Prosecutor v. Saif al-Islam Gaddafi and Abdullah al-Senussi, “Decision on the postponement of the 
                   execution of the request for surrender of Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi pursuant to article 95 of the Rome Statute” 
                   ICC-01/11-01/11-163, 1 June 2012, paras. 28-30. 
                                                                10 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                               
                                                        b)  Admissibility 
                  29. As set out in article 17(1) of the Statute, admissibility requires an assessment 
                  of  complementarity (subparagraphs (a)-(c)) and gravity (subparagraph (d)) in 
                  relation to a specific case. 
                   
                  30. In relation to complementarity, the Office will determine whether any State is 
                  exercising  its  jurisdiction  in  relation  to  the  same  person  for  substantially  the 
                                                                     24
                  same conduct as that alleged before the Court,  and if so, whether the national 
                  proceedings concerned are vitiated by an unwillingness or inability to investigate 
                  or  prosecute  genuinely.25  An  assessment  must  be  made  in  the  light  of  the 
                  proceedings as they exist at the national level at the time,26 and is potentially 
                  subject to revision based on any change of facts.27  
                           
                  31. If the national authorities are conducting, or have conducted, investigations28 
                  or prosecutions against the same person for substantially the same conduct, and 
                  such investigations or prosecutions have not been vitiated by an unwillingness 
                  or inability to genuinely carry them out, the case will not be selected for further 
                  investigation  and  prosecution.  Instead,  the  Office  may  consult  with  the 
                  authorities  in  question  to  share  the  information  or  evidence  it  has  collected, 
                  pursuant to article 93(10) of the Statute, or it may focus on other perpetrators that 
                  form part of the same or a different case theory, in line with a burden-sharing 
                             29
                  approach.    
                                                                   
                  24 The Prosecutor v. William Samoei Ruto, Henry Kiprono Kosgey and Joshua Arap Sang, “Judgment on 
                  the appeal of the Republic of Kenya against the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber II of 30 May 2011 entitled 
                  ‘Decision on the Application by the Government of Kenya Challenging the Admissibility of the Case 
                  Pursuant to Article 19(2)(b) of the Statute’”, ICC-01/09-01/11-307 OA, 30 August 2011, para. 1. 
                  25  The  Prosecutor v. Germain Katanga and Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui, “Judgment on the Appeal of Mr. 
                  Germain Katanga against the Oral Decision of Trial Chamber II of 12 June 2009 on the Admissibility of 
                  the Case”, ICC-01/04-01/07-1497 OA8, 25 September 2009, para. 78. 
                  26  The  Prosecutor  v.  Francis  Kirimi  Muthaura,  Uhuru  Muigai  Kenyatta  and  Mohammed  Hussein  Ali, 
                  “Decision on the Application by the Government of Kenya Challenging the Admissibility of the Case 
                  Pursuant to Article 19(2)(b) of the Statute”, ICC-01/09-02/11-96, 30 May 2011, paras. 56-65. 
                  27  The  Prosecutor v. Germain Katanga and Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui, “Judgment on the Appeal of Mr. 
                  Germain Katanga against the Oral Decision of Trial Chamber II of 12 June 2009 on the Admissibility of 
                  the Case”, ICC-01/04-01/07-1497 OA8, 25 September 2009, para. 56. See also article 19(4)-(5) and 19(10), 
                  Statute. 
                  28 The Appeals Chamber has held that the term “investigations” in this context signifies “the taking of steps 
                  directed  at  ascertaining  whether  those  suspects  are  responsible  for  that  conduct,  for  instance  by 
                  interviewing witnesses or suspects, collecting documentary evidence, or carrying out forensic analyses. The 
                  mere  preparedness  to  take  such  steps  or  the  investigation  of  other  suspects  is  not  sufficient.”  The 
                  Prosecutor v. William Samoei Ruto, Henry Kiprono Kosgey and Joshua Arap Sang, “Judgment on the 
                  appeal of the Republic of Kenya against the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber II of 30 May 2011 entitled 
                  ‘Decision on the Application by the Government of Kenya Challenging the Admissibility of the Case 
                  Pursuant to Article 19(2)(b) of the Statute’”, ICC-01/09-01/11-307 OA, 30 August 2011, para. 41.  
                  29 See paras. 7-8 above; see also para. 50(b) below. 
                                                              11 
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                 
                           
                   32. In relation to gravity as a criterion for admissibility under article 17(1)(d), the 
                   Appeals Chamber has dismissed the setting of an overly restrictive legal bar that 
                   would  hamper  the  deterrent  role  of  the  Court.30  The  factors  that  guide  the 
                   Office’s  assessment  of  gravity  include  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
                   considerations, relating to the scale, nature, manner of commission and impact of 
                               31
                   the crimes.    
                    
                                                       c)  Interests of Justice 
                   33. Considerations relating to the interests of justice will continue to be assessed 
                   on a case by case basis by the Office as a matter of best practice in the exercise of 
                   prosecutorial  discretion  over  case  selection.  As  set  out  in  the  Office’s  Policy 
                   Paper on the Interests of Justice,32 inter alia, the interests of victims include the 
                   victims’ interest in seeing justice done, but also other essential interests such as 
                   their protection, which the Court as a whole is obliged to ensure pursuant to 
                   article 68(1) of the Statute.  
                    
                    
                                              5.  CASE SELECTION CRITERIA 
                   34. The Office will select cases for investigation and prosecution in light of the 
                   gravity of the crimes, the degree of responsibility of the alleged perpetrators and 
                   the potential charges. The weight given to each criterion will depend on the facts 
                   and circumstances of each case and each situation, and the stage of development 
                   of the case hypothesis and investigation.33 The Case Selection Document will be 
                   reviewed as investigations proceed, by applying the same case selection criteria.34   
                    
                                                       a)  Gravity of crime(s) 
                   35. Gravity of crime(s) as a case selection criterion refers to the Office’s strategic 
                   objective to focus its investigations and prosecutions, in principle, on the most 
                                                                    
                   30 Situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, "Judgment on the Prosecutor's appeal against the 
                   decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I entitled 'Decision on the Prosecutor's Application for Warrants of Arrest, 
                   Article 58'", ICC-01/04-169, 13 July 2006, paras. 69-79. 
                   31  Regulation  29(2)  of  the  Regulations  of  the  Office  of  the  Prosecutor;  Policy  Paper  on  Preliminary 
                   Examinations, ICC-OTP November 2013, paras. 59-66; see also Situation in Georgia, “Decision on the 
                   Prosecutor’s request for authorization of an investigation”, ICC-01/15-12, 27 January 2016, para. 51. 
                   32 Policy Paper on the Interests of Justice, ICC-OTP, 2007. 
                   33 See para. 6 above. 
                   34 See para. 13 above and paras. 51, 53 below. 
                                                                12 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                               
                                                             35
                   serious crimes within a given situation  that are of concern to the international 
                   community as a whole.36 
                    
                   36. Gravity of crime(s) as a case selection criterion is assessed similarly to gravity 
                   as a factor for admissibility under article 17(1)(d). However, given that many 
                   cases might potentially be admissible under article 17, the Office may apply a 
                   stricter test when assessing gravity for the purposes of case selection than that 
                                                                                         37
                   which is legally required for the admissibility test under article 17.   
                           
                   37. The Office’s assessment of gravity includes both quantitative and qualitative 
                   considerations. As stipulated in regulation 29(2) of the Regulations of the Office, 
                   the factors that guide the Office’s assessment include the scale, nature, manner of 
                   commission, and impact of the crimes.38  
                           
                   38. The scale of the crimes may be assessed in light of, inter alia, the number of 
                   direct and indirect victims, the extent of the damage caused by the crimes, in 
                   particular  the  bodily  or  psychological  harm  caused  to  the  victims  and  their 
                   families, and their geographical or temporal spread (high intensity of the crimes 
                   over a brief period or low intensity of crimes over an extended period). 
                           
                   39. The nature of the crimes refers to the specific factual elements of each offence 
                   such as killings, rapes, other sexual or gender-based crimes,39 crimes committed 
                   against or affecting children, persecution, or the imposition of conditions of life 
                   on a group calculated to bring about its destruction. 
                           
                   40. The manner of commission of the crimes may be assessed in light of, inter alia, 
                   the means employed to execute the crime, the extent to which the crimes were 
                   systematic or resulted from a plan or organised policy or otherwise resulted from 
                   the abuse of power or official capacity, the existence of elements of particular 
                   cruelty,  including  the  vulnerability  of  the  victims,  any  motives  involving 
                   discrimination held by the direct perpetrators of the crimes, the use of rape and 
                                                                    
                   35 Strategic Plan, 2016-2018, ICC-OTP, 16 November 2015, paras. 34-37, 104. 
                   36 Preamble, para. 4, Statute. 
                   37 See para. 32 above. 
                   38  The  Prosecutor v. Bahar Idriss Abu Garda, “Decision on the confirmation of charges”, ICC-02/05-
                   02/09-243-Red, 8 February 2010, para. 31; Situation in the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, “Corrigendum to 
                   ‘Decision Pursuant to Article 15 of the Rome Statute on the Authorisation of an Investigation into the 
                   Situation in the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire’”, ICC-02/11-14-Corr, 3 October 2011, paras. 203-204. 
                   39 Policy Paper on Sexual and Gender-Based Crimes, ICC-OTP, June 2014.  
                                                              13 
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                
                   other  sexual  or  gender-based  violence  or  crimes  committed  by  means  of,  or 
                                                                                               40
                   resulting in, the destruction of the environment or of protected objects.  
                           
                   41. The impact of the crimes may be assessed in light of, inter alia, the increased 
                   vulnerability of victims, the terror subsequently instilled, or the social, economic 
                   and environmental damage inflicted on the affected communities. In this context, 
                   the Office will give particular consideration to prosecuting Rome Statute crimes 
                   that are committed by means of, or that result in, inter alia, the destruction of the 
                   environment,  the  illegal  exploitation  of  natural  resources  or  the  illegal 
                   dispossession of land.  
                           
                                      b)  Degree of responsibility of alleged perpetrators 
                   42. Regulation  34(1)  of  the  Regulations  of  the  Office  and  the  Prosecution’s 
                   Strategic Plan41 direct the Office to conduct its investigations towards ensuring 
                   that  charges  are  brought  against  those  persons  who  appear  to  be  the  most 
                   responsible for the identified crimes. In order to perform an objective and open-
                   ended investigation,  the  Office  will  first  focus  on  the  crime  base  in  order  to 
                   identify the organisations (including their structures) and individuals allegedly 
                   responsible  for  the  commission  of  the  crimes.  That  may  entail  the  need  to 
                   consider the investigation and prosecution of a limited number of mid- and high-
                   level perpetrators in order to ultimately build the evidentiary foundations for 
                   case(s) against those most responsible. The Office may also decide to prosecute 
                   lower  level-perpetrators  where  their  conduct  has  been  particularly  grave  or 
                   notorious.  
                    
                   43. The notion of the most responsible does not necessarily equate with the de 
                   jure hierarchical status of an individual within a structure, but will be assessed 
                   on  a  case-by-case  basis  depending  on  the  evidence.  As  the  investigation 
                   progresses, the extent of responsibility of any identified alleged perpetrator(s) 
                   will be assessed on the basis of, inter alia, the nature of the unlawful behaviour; 
                   the degree of their participation and intent; the existence of any motive involving 
                                                                                  42
                   discrimination; and any abuse of power or official capacity.  
                    
                   44. The degree of responsibility of alleged perpetrator(s) will also be taken into 
                   consideration when defining the charges. The Office will explore and present the 
                   most  appropriate  range  of  modes  of  liability  to  legally  qualify  the  criminal 
                                                                    
                   40 See articles 8(2)(b)(ix) and 8(2)(e)(iv) of the Statute. 
                   41 Strategic Plan, 2016-2018, ICC-OTP, 16 November 2015, para.34, last bullet point. 
                   42 Rules 145(1)(c) and 145(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence.  
                                                               14 
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                 
                   conduct alleged. For this purpose, the Office will also consider the deterrent and 
                   expressive effects that each mode of liability may entail. For example, the Office 
                   considers  that  the  responsibility  of  commanders  and  other  superiors  under 
                   article 28 of the Statute is a key form of liability, as it offers a critical tool to 
                   ensure  the  principle  of  responsible  command  and  thereby  end  impunity  for 
                                                                       43
                   crimes and contribute towards their prevention.  
                    
                                                             c)  Charges 
                   45. The Office will aim to represent as much as possible the true extent of the 
                   criminality which has occurred within a given situation, in an effort to ensure, 
                   jointly  with  the  relevant  national  jurisdictions,  that  the  most  serious  crimes 
                   committed in each situation do not go unpunished. Consistent with regulation 
                   34(2) of the Regulations of the Office of the Prosecutor, the charges chosen will 
                   constitute,  whenever  possible,  a  representative  sample  of  the  main  types  of 
                   victimisation and of the communities which have been affected by the crimes in 
                   that situation.  
                    
                   46. The Office will pay particular attention to crimes that have been traditionally 
                   under-prosecuted, such as crimes against or affecting children as well as rape 
                   and other sexual and gender-based crimes. It will also pay particular attention to 
                   attacks against cultural, religious, historical and other protected objects as well as 
                                                                            44
                   against humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel.  In so doing, the Office will 
                   aim to highlight the gravity of these crimes, thereby helping to end impunity for, 
                   and contributing to the prevention of, such crimes. 
                           
                    
                                          6.  CASE PRIORITISATION CRITERIA 
                   47. The  Office  aims  to  investigate  and  prosecute  all  cases  that  are  selected 
                   pursuant to the case selection criteria set out above.45  
                    
                   48. Prioritisation  governs  the  process  by  which  cases  that  meet  the  selection 
                   criteria are rolled-out over time. A case that is temporarily not prioritised is not 
                                                                    
                   43 See The Prosecutor v. Jean-Pierre Bemba, “Judgment pursuant to Article 74 of the Statute”, ICC-01/05-
                   01/08-3343, 21 March 2016, para. 172; The Prosecutor v. Jean-Pierre Bemba, “Decision on Sentence 
                   pursuant to Article 76 of the Statute”, ICC-01/05-01/08-3399, 21 June 2016, para. 16. 
                   44 The Office aims to issue a policy paper for each of the above priority crimes. See Policy Paper on Sexual 
                   and Gender-Based Crimes, ICC-OTP, June 2014. Other policy papers will be published on the Court’s 
                   website (https://www.icc-cpi.int/about/otp/Pages/otp-policies.aspx). 
                   45 As noted in paragraph 13 above, case selection decisions will also need to be reviewed and revisited as 
                   investigations progress. 
                                                                15 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                   thereby deselected: it remains part of the Case Selection Document and the Office 
                   will endeavour to investigate and prosecute such cases as circumstances permit, 
                   based on the criteria below.  
                    
                   49. Case prioritisation flows from the requirement under article 54(1)(b) that the 
                   Office  take  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  the  effective  investigation  and 
                   prosecution of crimes. It takes into account the practical realities faced by the 
                   Office in its work, including the number of cases the Office can investigate and 
                   prosecute during a given period with the resources available to it. Accordingly, 
                   based on information and evidence, as well as the operational environment at 
                   any given time, the Office will need to prioritise among the selected cases within 
                   a situation and across the various situations.  
                    
                   50. For  the  prioritisation  of  cases,  the  Office  will  take  into  consideration  the 
                   following strategic case prioritisation criteria: 
                       a) a  comparative assessment across the selected cases, based on the same 
                          factors that guide the case selection;  
                       b) whether  a  person,  or  members  of  the  same  group,  have  already  been 
                          subject to investigation or prosecution either by the Office or by a State for 
                          another serious crime;  
                       c) the impact of investigations and prosecutions on the victims of the crimes 
                                                       46
                          and affected communities;   
                       d) the  impact  of  investigations  and  prosecutions  on  ongoing  criminality 
                          and/or their contribution to the prevention of crimes; and  
                       e) the impact and the ability of the Office to pursue cases involving opposing 
                                                                                     47
                          parties to a conflict in parallel or on a sequential basis.  
                   51. The Office will also take into consideration the following operational case 
                   prioritisation  criteria,  to  ensure  that  the  Office  focuses  on  cases  in  which  it 
                   appears that it can conduct an effective and successful investigation leading to a 
                                                                                      48
                   prosecution  with  a  reasonable  prospect  of  conviction.   Although  these 
                                                                    
                   46 See para. 9 above.   
                   47 See para. 20 above.  
                   48 See also Policy Paper on Preliminary Examinations, ICC-OTP, November 2013, para. 70, discussing the 
                   non-applicability of “feasibility” as separate legal factor for determining the opening of investigations. At 
                   the  case  prioritisation  stage,  by  contrast,  operational  feasibility  does  become  a  relevant  factor  when 
                   exercising discretion regarding the timing of the roll-out of selected cases. 
                                                                16 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                 
          considerations will typically arise in all of the Office’s activities and routinely 
          require the adoption of measures to mitigate and manage their effect, the criteria 
          below will be used to assess operational viability in a relative manner across 
          selected cases: 
            a) the quantity and quality of the incriminating and exonerating evidence 
             already  in  the  possession  of  the  Office,  as  well  as  the  availability  of 
             additional evidence and any risks to its degradation; 
            b) international cooperation and judicial assistance to  support the Office’s 
             activities;  
            c) the  Office’s  capacity  to  effectively  conduct  the  necessary  investigations 
             within a reasonable period of time, including the security situation in the 
             area where the Office is planning to operate or where persons cooperating 
             with the Office reside, and the Court’s ability to protect persons from risks 
             that might arise from their interaction with the Office; and  
            d) the potential to secure the appearance of suspects before the Court, either 
             by arrest and surrender or pursuant to a summons. 
          52. The above strategic and operational case prioritisation criteria stand in no 
          hierarchical  order  to  each  other.  The  specific  weight  to  be  given  to  each 
          individual criterion will depend on the circumstances of each case. 
           
          53. As  the  investigations  proceed,  the  Office  shall  continuously  re-evaluate, 
          based on the same criteria, whether it can continue to conduct the necessary 
          investigations leading to a prosecution with a reasonable prospect of conviction. 
          If  it  appears to the Office at any given point in time that it cannot do so, the 
          Office  may decide to deprioritise and postpone the investigation of that case 
          until  conditions have improved. It may also reconsider such a decision if the 
          circumstances have changed favourably, including the extent to which the Office 
          has been able to overcome any operational obstacle(s) to conducting an effective 
          investigation. 
           
          54. Where  witness  interference  or  evidence  tampering  has  caused  the 
          degradation  of  the  collected  evidence  or  has  impacted  on  the  conditions  of 
          evidence-gathering  or  further  investigations  or  on  the  trial  proceedings,  the 
          Office will consider whether to commence prosecutions pursuant to article 70 of 
          the  Statute  for  offences  against  the  administration  of  justice.  This  will  be 
          particularly  so  when  witness  interference  or  evidence  tampering  has  affected 
                                17 
                                 
                                 
                                                                 
                   investigations which are advanced to such an extent that the Office considers to 
                   be trial ready. Mindful of its mandate and the need to focus its efforts on the 
                   prosecution  of  core  crimes,  the  Office  will  resort  to  article  70  prosecutions 
                   bearing  in  mind  the  factors  set  out  in  rule  162(2)  and  it  will  in  any  event 
                   cooperate with national authorities, as appropriate.  
                    
                   55. If,  at  any  stage  in  the  proceedings,  the  Office  considers  that  the  evidence 
                   available,  including  both  incriminating  and  exonerating  evidence,  does  not 
                   support an element of the charges pleaded or supports a different charge, or that 
                   any charge pleaded otherwise cannot be pursued, the Office will seek to amend 
                   or  withdraw  the  relevant  charge(s)  pursuant  to  articles  61(4)  and  (9)  of  the 
                   Statute, or in appropriate circumstances, submit the matter to the Trial Chamber 
                                                                                  49
                   pursuant to regulation 55 of the Regulations of the Court.   
                    
                                                                    
                   49 Regulation 60, Regulations of the Office of the Prosecutor. 
                                                                18 
                                                                 
                                                                 
