             New Medicine Service: helping you with your new medicine 
                                                                                           
             What this leaflet is for 
             If you have been invited to use the New Medicine Service (NMS) or want to know more about it 
             then this leaflet will give you the information you need. 
              
             What is the New Medicine Service? 
             The New Medicine Service is a free NHS service, offered through your pharmacy (chemist), to 
             help you understand your condition and get the most out of your new medicine.  
              
             Who is it for? 
             The service is for people who have received their first prescription for a medicine to treat any of 
             the following conditions: 
                       asthma 
                       lung conditions such as chronic bronchitis and emphysema 
                       type 2 diabetes 
                       high blood pressure  
                       conditions where you take a medicine to control the way your blood clots. 
              
             How will it help me? 
             Between 30% and 50% of prescribed medicines are not taken as recommended. This means 
             that a lot of medicines are wasted or are not as effective as they could be. 
             The service will: 
                   -    help you to find out more about the new medicine you are taking 
                   -    help to sort out any problems you are having with your new medicine 
                   -    give you a chance to ask questions about your medicine and discuss any concerns 
                   -    help to improve the effectiveness of your new medicine, for example, there may be an 
                        easier or better way to take it 
                   -    help you to make your own decisions about managing your condition 
                   -    help you to improve your health, which could lead to fewer GP and hospital visits. 
             The New Medicine Service will help provide better value for you and the NHS by making sure 
             that your medicines are right for you. 
              
             How does the service work? 
             When you are given your new medicine you will be asked if you want to sign up to the service, 
             which will be provided in three parts.  If you agree, you will need to sign a consent form to allow 
             your pharmacist to share your information with other parts of the NHS (see below). 
               Step            Your pharmacist will give you information about your new medicine.  
               1 
               Step            You will be invited to a meeting with your pharmacist between 7 and 14 days after 
               2               you first receive your medicine. You will be able to choose a time that suits you. 
                               This is a confidential conversation and will be provided in a private area within the 
                               pharmacy or if you prefer, you could choose to have the discussion over the 
                     telephone.  
                     Your pharmacist will ask you questions about how you are getting on with your new 
                     medicine, find out if you are having any problems and give you any information and 
                     support you need. You may have concerns or questions that you want to ask. You 
                     can ask anything at all about your new medicine. 
          Step       Your pharmacist will arrange a follow-up discussion with you 14 to 21 days after step 
          3          2. You will be able to talk about how things are going with your medicine and ask for 
                     more advice if you need it. 
          
         Why do I need to sign a consent form?  
         In order to receive this service, you will be asked to give your consent for your pharmacist to 
         share information from your New Medicine Service discussions with: 
               your GP, if necessary (for example if they need to change your medicine because you 
                are having a problem with it) 
               your primary care trust (PCT - the local NHS authority), to make sure that the service is 
                being provided properly by your pharmacist 
               your PCT, the NHS Business Services Authority and the Secretary of State for Health, to 
                make sure your pharmacy is being paid the correct amount by the NHS for the service 
                they have provided you. 
         If you do not give your consent you will not be able to use the service. However, when you first 
         receive your medicines your pharmacist will still give you advice about them.  
         How can you prepare for your discussions with the pharmacist? 
               Read the leaflet that comes with your new medicine. 
               Make a note of questions you want to ask about your new medicine. 
               Make a note of any concerns about your new medicine that you may want to discuss with 
                your pharmacist. 
               Bring your new medicine to the meeting with your pharmacist. 
         What happens after the two discussions? 
               Everything may be okay with your new medicine and nothing else will need to happen. 
               If you have had problems with the medicine, you may agree with your pharmacist to 
                change the way you take it. 
               Your pharmacist may recommend that your doctor reviews your new medicine. If this is 
                needed your pharmacist will send a note to your doctor explaining the issues raised. You 
                can have a copy of this note. 
          
