                       The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics* 
                       
                                     David Colander,                                    Hans Föllmer 
                                Department of Economics                          Department of Mathematics 
                                   Middlebury College                            Humboldt University Berlin 
                                  Middlebury, VE, USA                                  Berlin, Germany 
                                               
                                       Armin Haas                                     Michael Goldberg 
                      Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research     Whittemore School of Business & Economics
                                    Potsdam, Germany                            University of New Hampshire 
                                                                                     Durham, NH, USA 
                                                                                                
                                     Katarina Juselius                                   Alan Kirman 
                                Department of Economics                  GREQAM, Université d’Aix-Marseille lll, 
                                University of Copenhagen                                EHESS et IUF 
                                  Copenhagen, Denmark                                 Marseille, France 
                                                                                                
                                       Thomas Lux1                                      Brigitte Sloth 
                                Department of Economics                    Department of Business and Economics 
                                    University of Kiel                        University of Southern Denmark 
                                             &                                        Odense, Denmark 
                          Kiel Institute for the World Economy 
                                      Kiel, Germany 
                       
                      Abstract: The economics profession appears to have been unaware of the long build-up to the 
                        current worldwide financial crisis and to have significantly underestimated its dimensions once 
                        it started to unfold. In our view, this lacunderstanding is due to a mk of   isallocation of research 
                        efforts in economics. We trace the deeper roots of this failure to the profession’s insistence on 
                        constructing models that, by design, disregard the key elements driving outcomes in real-world 
                        markets. The economics profession has failed in communicating the limitations, weaknesses, 
                        and even dangers of its preferred models to the public. This state of affairs makes clear the need 
                        for a major reorientation of focus in the research economists undertake, as well as for the 
                        establishment of an ethical code that would ask economists to understand and communicate the 
                        limitations and potential misuses of their models.  
                       
                      Keywords: financial crisis, academic moral hazard, ethic responsibility of researchers 
                       
                      *  This opinion paper is the outcome of one week of intense discussions within the working group on 
                                                               th Dahlem Workshop, 2008. We are grateful to Carlo Jaeger and 
                        ‘Modeling of Financial Markets’ at the 98
                        Rupert Klein for organizing this stimulating meeting and to Deirdre McCloskey and other participants for 
                        helpful comments. 
                       
                                                                              
                      1 Corresponding author:  Address: University of Kiel, Department of Economics, Olshausenstraße 40 
                      D-24118 Kiel, lux@bwl.uni-kiel.de 
                                           The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                          
                         1. Introduction 
                                               
                         The global financial crisis has revealed the need to rethink fundamentally how financial 
                         systems are regulated. It has also made clear a            systemic failure of th e economics profession . 
                         Over the past three decades, economists have largely developed and come to rely on 
                         models that disregard key factors—including heterogeneity of decision rules, revisions of 
                         forecasting strategies, and changes in the social context—that drive outcomes in asset and 
                         other markets. It is obvious, even to the casual observer that these models fail to account 
                         for the actual evolution of the real-world ec          onomy. Moreover, the current academic agenda 
                         has largely crowded out research on the inherent causes of fi nancial crises. There has also 
                         been little exploration of early in dicators of system crisis and potential ways to prevent this 
                         malady from developing. In fact, if one browses through the academic macroeconomics 
                         and finance literature, “systemic crisis” appears like an otherworldly event that is absent 
                         from economic models. Most models, by design, offer no immediate handle on how to 
                         think about or deal with       this recurring phenomenon.         2 In our hour of gr    eatest need, societies 
                         around the world are left to grope in the dark without a theory. That, to us, is a systemic 
                         failure of the economics profession.  
                          
                         The implicit view behind standard models is that markets and economies are inherently 
                         stable and that they only temporarily get off track. The majority of economists thus failed 
                         to warn policy makers about the threatening system crisis and ignored the work of those 
                         who did. Ironically, as the crisis has unfolded, economists have had no choice but to 
                         abandon their standard models and to produce hand-waving common-sense remedies. 
                         Common-sense advice, although useful, is a poor substitute for an underlying model that 
                         can provide much-needed guidance for developing policy and regulation. It is not enough 
                         to put the existing model to one side, observing that one needs, “exceptional measures for 
                         exceptional times”. What we need are models capable of envisaging such “exceptional 
                         times”. 
                          
                         The confinement of macroeconomics to models of stable states that are perturbed by 
                         limited external shocks and that neglect the            intrinsic recurrent boom-and-bust dynamics of 
                         our economic system is remarkable. After all,  worldwide financial a                   nd economic crises are 
                         hardly new and they have had a tremendous impact beyond the immediate economic 
                         consequences of mass unemployment and hyper inflation. This is even more surprising, 
                         given the long academic legacy of earlier economists’ study of crisis phenomena, which 
                         can be found in the work of Walter Bagehot (1873), Axel Leijonhuvfud (2000), Charles 
                                                                                 
                         2 Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) argue that the current financisis difial cr fers little from a long chain of similar crises in 
                          developed and developing countries. We certainly share their view. The problem is that the received body of models in 
                          macro finance to which these authors have prominently contributed provides no room whatsoever for such recurrent 
                          boom and bust cycles. The literature has, therefore, been a major source of the illusory ‘this time it is different’ view that 
                          the authors themselves criticize. 
                          2
                                              The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                           Kindleberger (1989), and Hyman Minsky (1986), to name a few prominent examples. This 
                           tradition, however, has been neglected and even suppressed.  
                            
                           The most recent literature provides us with examples of blindness against the upcoming 
                           storm that seem odd in retrospect. For example, in their analysis of the risk management 
                           implications of CDOs, Krahnen (2005) and Krahnen and Wilde (2006) mention the 
                           possibility of an increase of ‘systemic risk.’ But, they conclude that this aspect should not 
                           be the concern of the banks engaged in the CDO market, because it is the governments’ 
                           responsibility to provide costless insurance against a system-wide crash. On the more 
                           theoretical side, a recent and prominent strand of literature essentially argues that 
                           consumers and investors are too risk averse because of their memory of the (improbable) 
                           event of the Great Depression (e.g., Cogley a                 nd Sargent, 2008). Much of the motivation for 
                           economics as an academic discipline stems from the desire to explain phenomena like 
                           unemployment, boom and bust cycles, and financial crises, but the dominant theoretical 
                           model excludes many of the aspects of the economy that will likely lead to a crisis. 
                           Confining theoretical models to ‘normal’ time                  s without consideration of such defects might 
                           seem contradictory to the focus that the aver age taxpayer would expect  of the scientists on 
                           his payroll.  
                            
                           This failure has deep methodological roots. The often heard definition of economics—that 
                           it is concerned with the ‘allocation of scarce resources’—is short-sighted and misleading. 
                           It reduces economics to the study of optimal decisions in well-specified choice problems. 
                           Such research generally loses track of the inherent dynamics of economic systems and the 
                           instability that accompanies its complex dynamics. Without an adequate understanding of 
                           these processes, one is likely to miss the major factors that influence the economic sphere 
                                                 3
                           of our societies.  The inadequate definition of economics often leads researchers to 
                           disregard questions about the coordination of actors and the possibility of coordination 
                           failures. Indeed, analysis of these issues woul               d require a different type of mathematics than 
                           that which is generally used now by many prominent economic models.  
                            
                           Many of the financial economists who developed the theoretical models upon which the 
                           modern financial structure is built were well aware of the strong and highly unrealistic 
                           restrictions imposed on their models to assure                 stability. Yet, financial economists gave little 
                           warning to the public about th           e fragility of their models; 4 even as they saw individuals and 
                           businesses build a financial system based on their work. There are a number of possible 
                           explanations for this failure to warn the public. One is a “lack of understanding” 
                                                                                   
                           3 For example, the German members of this group of authors share a vivid memory of a prominent economic adviser in 
                            their country elaborating very recently on the supposed impor   tance of extending shopping ti mes to increase ‘efficiency,’ 
                            presumably unaware of the major crisis (and the source of major inefficiencies) that was already looming as he spoke. 
                            
                           4 Indeed, few researchers explored the consequences of a breakdown of their assumptions, even though this was rather 
                            likely. 
                            3
                                       The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                      explanation--the researchers did not know the models were fragile. We find this 
                      explanation highly unlikely; financial engineers are extremely bright, and it is almost 
                      inconceivable that such bright individuals        did not understand the limitations of the models. 
                      A second, more likely explanation, is that they did not consider it their job to warn the 
                      public. If that is the cause of their failure, we    believe that it involves a misunderstanding of 
                      the role of the economist, and involves an ethical breakdown. In our view, economists, as 
                      with all scientists, have an ethical responsibility to communicate the limitations of their 
                      models and the potential misuses of their research. Currently, there is no ethical code for 
                      professional economic scientists. There should be one.  
                       
                      In the following pages, we identify some major areas of concern in theory and applied 
                      methodology and point out their connection to crisis phenomena. We also highlight some 
                      promising avenues of study that may provide guidance for future researchers.  
                       
                           2. Models (or the Use of Models) as a Source of Risk 
                       
                      The economic textbook models applied for allocation of scarce resources are 
                      predominantly of the Robinson Crusoe (representative agent) type. Financial market 
                      models are obtained by letting Robinson manage his financial affairs as a sideline to his 
                      well-considered utility maximization over his (finite or infinite) expected lifespan taking 
                      into account with correct probabilities all potential future happenings. This approach is 
                      mingled with insights from Walrasian general equilibrium theory, in particular the finding 
                      of the Arrrow-Debreu two-period model that all           uncertainty can be eliminated if only there 
                      are enough contingent claims (i.e., appropriate derivative instruments). This theoretical 
                      result (a theorem in an extremely stylized model) underlies the belief shared by many 
                      economists that the introduction of new classes of derivatives can only be welfare 
                      increasing (a view obviously originally shared by former Fed Chairman Greenspan). It is 
                      worth emphasizing that this view is not an empirically grounded belief but an opinion 
                      derived from a benchmark model that is much too abstract to be confronted with data. 
                       
                      On the practical side, mathematical portfolio and risk management models have been the 
                      academic backbone of the tremendous increase of trading volume and diversification of 
                      instruments in financial markets. Typically, new derivative products achieve market 
                      penetration only if a certain industry standard has been established for pricing and risk 
                      management of these products. Mostly, pricing principles are derived from a set of 
                      assumptions on an ‘appropriate’ process for the underlying asset, (i.e., the primary assets 
                      on which options or forwards are written) together with an equilibrium criterion such as 
                      arbitrage-free prices. With that mostly comes advice for hedging the inherent risk of a 
                      derivative position by balancing it with other assets that neutralize the risk exposure. The 
                      most prominent example is certainly the development of a theory of option pricing by 
                      Black and Scholes that eventually (in the eighties) could even be implemented on pocket 
                       4
                                     The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                     calculators. Simultaneously with Black-Scholes option pricing, the same principles led to 
                     the widespread introduction of new strategies      under the heading of por tfolio insurance and 
                     dynamic hedging that just tried to implement a theoretically risk-free portfolio composed 
                     of both assets and options and k    eep it risk-free by frequent re balancing after changes of its 
                     input data (e.g., asset prices). For structured pr  oducts for credit risk, the basic paradigm of 
                     derivative pricing – perfect replication – is not applicable so that one has to rely on a kind 
                     of rough-and-ready evaluation of these contracts on the base of historical data. 
                     Unfortunately, historical data were hardly avai    lable in most cases which meant that one had 
                     to rely on simulations with relatively arbitrary assumptions on correlations between risks 
                     and default probabilities. This makes the theoretical foundations of all these products 
                     highly questionable – the equivalent to build     ing a building of cement of which you weren’t 
                     sure of the components. The dramatic recent rise of the markets for structured products 
                     (most prominently collateralized debt obligations and credit default swaps - CDOs and 
                     CDSs) was made possible by development of such simulation-based pricing tools and the 
                     adoption of an industry-standard for these under the lead of rating agencies. Barry 
                     Eichengreen (2008) rightly points out that the “development of mathematical methods 
                     designed to quantify and hedge risk encourag ed commercial banks, investment banks and 
                     hedge funds to use more leverage” as if the very use of the mathematical methods 
                     diminished the underlying risk. He also notes  that the models were estimated on data from 
                     periods of low volatility and thus    could not deal with the arriva l of major changes. Worse, it 
                     is our contention that such major changes are endemic to the economy and cannot be 
                     simply ignored. 
                      
                     What are the flaws of the new unregulated financial markets which have emerged? As we 
                     have already pointed out in the introduction, the possibility of systemic risk has not been 
                     entirely ignored but it has been defined as lying outside the responsibility of market 
                     participants. In this way, moral hazard concerning systemic risk has been a necessary and 
                     built-in attribute of the system. The neglect of the systemic part in the ‘normal mode of 
                     operation’, of course, implies that external effects are not taken properly into account and 
                     that in tendency, market participants will ignore the influence of their own behavior on the 
                     stability of the system. The interesting aspect is more that this was a known and accepted 
                     element of operations. Note that the blame       should not only fall on market participants, but 
                     also on the deliberate ignoring of the systemic risk factors or the failure to at least point 
                     them out to the public amounts to a sort of academic ‘moral hazard’. 
                      
                     There are some additional aspects as well: asset-pricing and risk management tools are 
                     developed from an individualistic perspective, taking as given (ceteris paribus) the 
                     behavior of all other market participants. However, popular models might be used by a 
                     large number or even the majority of market participants. Similarly, a market participant 
                     (e.g., the notorious Long-Term Capital Manageme         nt) might become so dominant in certain 
                     markets that the ceteris paribus assumption becomes unrealistic. The simultaneous pursuit 
                      5
                                      The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                      of identical micro strategies leads to synchronous behavior and mechanic contagion. This 
                      simultaneous application might generate an unexpected macro outcome that actually 
                      jeopardizes the success of the underlying micro st      rategies. A perfect illustration is the U.S. 
                      stock market crash of October 1987. Triggered by a small decrease of prices, automated 
                      hedging strategies produced an avalanche of sell orders that out of the blue led to a fall in 
                      U.S. stock indices of about 20 percent within one day. With the massive sales to rebalance 
                      their portfolios (along the lines of Black and Scholes), the rele     vant actors could not realize 
                      their attempted incremental adjustments, but rather suffered major losses from the ensuing 
                      large macro effect. 
                       
                      A somewhat different aspect is the danger of a      control illusion: The mathematical rigor and 
                      numerical precision of risk management and asset pricing tools has a tendency to conceal 
                      the weaknesses of models and assumptions to those who have not developed them and do 
                      not know the potential weakness of the assumptions and it is indeed this that Eichengreen 
                      emphasizes. Naturally, models are only approximations to the real world dynamics and 
                      partially built upon quite heroic assumptions (most notoriously: Normality of asset price 
                      changes which can be rejected at a confidence level of 99. 9999…. Anyone who has 
                      attended a course in first-year statistics can do this within minutes). Of course, 
                      considerable progress has been made by moving to more refined models with, e.g., 
                      ‘fat-tailed’ Levy processes as their driving factors. However, while such models better 
                      capture the intrinsic volatility  of markets, their improved perf ormance, taken at face value, 
                      might again contribute to enhancing the control illusion of the naïve user.  
                       
                      The increased sophistication of extant mode      ls does, however, not overcome the robustness 
                      problem and should not absolve the modelers fr       om explaining their limitations to the users 
                      in the financial industry. As in nuclear physic    s, the tools provided by  financial engineering 
                      can be put to very different uses so that what    is designed as an instru  ment to hedge risk can 
                      become a weapon of ‘financial mass destruction’ (in the words of Warren Buffet) if used 
                      for increased leverage. In fact, it appears that derivative positions have been built up often 
                      in speculative ways to profit from high returns as long as the downside risk does not 
                      materialize. Researchers who develop such m odels can claim they are neutral academics – 
                      developing tools that people are free to use or not. We do not find that view credible. 
                      Researchers have an ethical res ponsibility to point out to the     public when the tool that they 
                      developed is misused. It is the responsibility of    the researcher to make clear from the outset 
                      the limitations and underlying assumptions of his models and warn of the dangers of their 
                      mechanic application. 
                       
                      What follows from our diagnosis? Market partic        ipants and regulators have to become more 
                      sensitive towards the potential weaknesses of risk management models. Since we do not 
                      know the ‘true’ model, robustness should be a key concern. Model uncertainty should be 
                      taken into account by applying more than a single model. For example, one could rely on 
                       6
                                               The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                           probabilistic projections that cover a whole range of specific models (cf., Föllmer, 2008). 
                           The theory of robust control provides a toolbox of                      techniques that could be applied for this 
                           purpose, and it is an approach that should be considered.  
                            
                                3.  Unrealistic Model Assumptions and Unrealistic Outcomes 
                            
                           Many economic models are built upon the twin assumptions of ‘rational expectations’ and 
                           a representative agent. ‘Rational expectations’ forces individuals’ expectations into 
                           harmony with the structure of the economist’s own model. This concept can be thought of 
                           as merely a way to close a model. A behavioral interpretation of rational expectations 
                           would imply that individuals and the economist have a complete understanding of the 
                           economic mechanisms governing the world. In this  sense, rational expe ctations models do 
                           not formalize expectations as such: they ar                 e not written down as a component of the model 
                           according to some empirical observation of the expectation formation of human actors. 
                           Thus, even when applied economics research or psychology provide insights about how 
                           individuals actually form expectations, these insights cannot be used within RE models. 
                           Leaving no place for imperfect knowledge and ad                       aptive adjustments, rational expectations 
                           models are typically found to have dynamics that are not smooth enough to fit economic 
                           data well.  
                            
                           Technically, rational expectations models are often framed as dynamic programming 
                           problems in macroeconomics. But, dynamic  programming models have serious limitations. 
                           Specifically, to make them analytically tractable, researchers assume representative agents 
                           and rational expectations, which assume away any heterogeneity among economic actors. 
                           Such models presume that there is a single m                   odel of the economy,   which is odd given that 
                           even economists are divided in their views about the correct  model of the economy. While 
                           other currents of research do exist, economic policy advice, particularly in financial 
                           economics, has far too often been based (consciously or not) on a set of axioms and 
                           hypotheses derived ultimately from a highly limited dynamic control model, using the 
                           Robinson approach with ‘rational’ expectations. 
                            
                           The major problem is that despite its many refine ments, this is not at all an approach based 
                                                                                      5
                           on, and confirmed by, empirical research.  In fact, it stands in stark contrast to a broad set 
                           of regularities in human behavior discovered both in psychology and what is called 
                           behavioral and experimental economics. The corner stones of many models in finance and 
                           macroeconomics are rather maintained  despite all the contradictory                             evidence discovered in 
                                                                                   
                           5 The historical emergence of the representative agent paradigm is a mystery. Ironically, it appeared over the 70s after a 
                             period of intense discussions on the problem of aggregation    in economics (that basically yielded negative results such as 
                             the impossibility to demonstrated ‘nice’ properties of aggregate demand or supply functions without imposing extreme 
                             assumptions on individual behavior). The representative agent appeared without methodological discussion. In the 
                             words of Deirdre McCloskey:  “It became a rule in the conve     rsation of some economists because Tom and Bob said so.” 
                             (personal communication). Today, this convention has become so strong that many young economists wouldn’t know of 
                             an alternative way to approach macroeconomic issues. 
                            7
                                        The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                       empirical research. Much of this literature shows that human subjects act in a way that 
                       bears no resemblance to the rational expectations paradigm and also have problems 
                       discovering ‘rational expectations equilibria’ in repeated experimental settings. Rather, 
                       agents display various forms of ‘bounded rationality’ using heuristic decision rules and 
                       displaying inertia in their reaction to new information. They have also been shown in 
                       financial markets to be strongly influenced        by emotional and hormonal reactions (see Lo           et 
                       al., 2005, and Coates and Herbert, 2008) Economic modeling has to take such findings 
                       seriously.  
                        
                       What we are arguing is that as a modeling requirement, internal consistency must be 
                       complemented with external consistency: Economic modeling has to be compatible with 
                       insights from other branches of science on human behavior. It is highly problematic to 
                       insist on a specific view of humans in economic settings that is irreconcilable with 
                       evidence. 
                        
                       The ‘representative agent’ aspect of many current models in macroeconomics (including 
                       macro finance) means that modelers subscribe to the most extreme form of conceptual 
                       reductionism (Lux and Westerhoff, 2009): by assumption, all concepts applicable to the 
                       macro sphere (i.e., the economy or its financial system) are fully reduced to concepts and 
                       knowledge for the lower-level domain of the indi          vidual agent. It is worth emphasizing that 
                       this is quite different from the standard reductionist concept that has become widely 
                       accepted in natural sciences. The more standard notion of reductionism amounts to an 
                       approach to understanding the nature of complex phenomena by reducing them to the 
                                                      
                       interactions of their parts, allowing for new, emergent phenomena at the higher hierarchical 
                       level (the concept of ‘more is different’, cf. Anderson, 1972).  
                        
                       Quite to the contrary, the representative agent approach in economics has simply set the 
                       macro sphere equal to the micro sphere in all respects. One could, indeed, say that this 
                       concept negates the existence of a macro sphere and the necessity of investigating 
                       macroeconomic phenomena in that it views the entire economy as an organism governed 
                                              6
                       by a universal will.  Any notion of “systemic risk” or “coordination failure” is necessarily 
                       absent from, and alien to, such a methodology.  
                        
                       For natural scientists, the distinction between micro-level phenomena and those 
                       originating on a macro, system-wide scale from the interaction of microscopic units is 
                       well-known. In a dispersed system, the current crisis would be seen as an involuntary 
                       emergent phenomenon of the microeconomic activity. The conceptual reductionist 
                       paradigm, however, blocks from the outset a ny understanding of the  interplay between the 
                       micro and macro levels. The differences between the overall system and its parts remain 
                                                                               
                       6 The conceptual reductionist approach of the representative agent is also remarkably different from the narrative of the 
                        ‘invisible hand’ which has more the flavor of ‘more is different’. 
                        8
                                           The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                         simply incomprehensible from the viewpoint of this approach.  
                          
                         In order to develop models that allow us to deduce macro events from microeconomic 
                         regularities, economists have to rethink the concept of micro foundations of 
                         macroeconomic models. Since economic activity is of an essentially interactive nature, 
                         economists’ micro foundations should allow for                 the interactions of economic agents. Since 
                         interaction depends on differences in information, motives, knowledge and capabilities, 
                         this implies heterogeneity of agents. For instance, only a sufficiently rich structure of 
                         connections between firms, households and a di spersed banking sector will allow us to get 
                         a grasp on “systemic risk”, domino effects in the financial sector, and their repercussions 
                         on consumption and investment. The dominance of the extreme form of conceptual 
                         reductionism of the representative agent has pr              evented economists from even attempting to 
                         model such all important phenomena. It is the flawed methodology that is the ultimate 
                         reason for the lack of applicability of the standard macro framework to current events.  
                          
                         Since most of what is relevant and interesting in economic life has to do with the 
                         interaction and coordination of ensembles of heterogeneous economic actors, the 
                         methodological preference for single actor models has extremely handicapped 
                         macroeconomic analysis and prevented it from approaching vital topics. For example, the 
                         recent surge of research in network theory has received relatively scarce attention in 
                         economics. Given the established curriculum of economic programs, an economist would 
                         find it much more tractable to study adultery as a dynamic optimization problem of a 
                         representative husband, and derive the optimal time path of marital infidelity (and publish 
                         his exercise) rather than investigating financial flows in the banking sector within a 
                         network theory framework. This is more than unf                 ortunate in view of the network aspects of 
                         interbank linkages that have become apparent during the current crisis.  
                          
                         In our view, a change of focus is necessary that takes seriously the regularities in 
                         expectation formation revealed by behavioral research and, in fact, gives back an 
                         independent role to expectations in economic models. It would also be fallacious to only 
                         replace the current paradigm by a representative ‘non-rational’ actor (as it is sometimes 
                         done in recent literature). Rather, an          appropriate micro foundation  is needed that considers 
                         interaction at a certain level of complexity a nd extracts macro regularities (where they exist) 
                         from microeconomic models with dispersed activity.  
                          
                         Once one acknowledges the importa              nce of empirically based be havioral micro foundations 
                         and the heterogeneity of actors, a rich spectrum of new models becomes available. The 
                         dynamic co-evolution of expectations and economic activity would allow one to study 
                         out-of-equilibrium dynamics and adaptive adjustments. Such dynamics could reveal the 
                         possibility of multiplicity and evolution of equilibria (e.g. with high or low employment) 
                         depending on agents’ expectations or even on the propagation of positive or negative 
                          9
                                                 The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                            ‘moods’ among the population. This would capture the psychological component of the 
                            business cycle which – though prominent in many policy-oriented discussions – is never 
                            taken into consideration in contemporary macroeconomic models.  
                             
                            It is worth noting that understanding the formation of such low-level equilibria might be 
                            much more valuable in coping with major ‘efficiency losses’ by mass unemployment than 
                            the pursuit of small ‘inefficiencies’ due to societal decisions on norms such as shop 
                            opening times. Models with interacting heterogeneous agents would also open the door to 
                            the incorporation of results from other fields: network theory has been mentioned as an 
                            obvious example (for models of networks in finance see Allen and Babus, 2008). 
                            ‘Self-organized criticality’ theory is another area that seems to have some appeal for 
                            explaining boom-and-bust cycles (cf. Scheinkman and Woodford, 1992). Incorporating 
                            heterogeneous agents with imperfect knowledge                           would also provide a better framework for 
                            the analysis of the use and dissemination of information through market operations and 
                            more direct links of communi cation. If one accepts that the dispersed economic activity of 
                            many economic agents could be described by stat                          istical laws, one might even take stock of 
                            methods from statistical physics to model dynamic economic systems (cf. Aoki and 
                            Yoshikawa, 2007; Lux, 2009, for examples).  
                             
                                  4.  Robustness and Data-Driven Empirical Research 
                             
                            Currently popular models (in particular: dyna mic general equilibrium models) do not only 
                            have weak micro foundations, th                 eir empirical performance is fa r from satisfactory (Juselius 
                            and Franchi, 2007). Indeed, the relevant stra                    nd of empirical economics has more and more 
                            avoided testing their models and has instead turned to calibration without explicit 
                                                                             7
                            consideration of goodness-of-fit.  This calibration is done using “deep economic 
                            parameters” such as parameters of utility functions derived from microeconomic studies. 
                            However, at the risk of being repetitive, it should be emphasized that micro parameters 
                            cannot be used directly in the parameterization of a macroeconomic model. The 
                            aggregation literature is full of examples that point out the possible “fallacies of 
                            composition”. The “deep parameters” only seem sensible if one considers the economy as a 
                            universal organism without interactions. If intera                      ctions are important (as it seems to us they 
                            are), the restriction of the parameter space imposed by using micro parameters is 
                            inappropriate.  
                             
                            Another concern is nonstationarity and structural shifts in the underlying data. Macro 
                            models, unlike many financial models, are often calibrated over long time horizons which 
                            include major changes in the regulatory framework of the countries investigated. Cases in 
                                                                                    
                            7 It is pretty obvious how the currently popular class of dynami     c general equilibrum models would have to ‘cope’ with the 
                              current financial crisis. It will be covered either by a dummy or it will have to be interpreted as a very large negative 
                              stochastic shock to the economy, i.e. as an event equivalent to a large asteroid strike. 
                             10
                                        The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                       question are the movements between different exchange rate regimes and the deregulation 
                       of financial markets over the 70s and 80s. In summary, it seems to us that much of 
                       contemporary empirical work in macroeconomics  and finance is driven by the pre-analytic 
                       belief in the validity of a certain model. Rather than (mis)using statistics as a means to 
                       illustrate these beliefs, the goal should be to put  theoretical models to scientific test (as the 
                       naïve believer in positive science would expect).  
                        
                       The current approach of using pre-selected models is problematic and we recommend a 
                       more data-driven methodology. Instead of starting out with an ad-hoc specification and 
                       questionable ceteris paribus assumptions, the key features of the data should be explored 
                       via data-analytical tools and specification tests.   David Hendry provid             es a well-established 
                       empirical methodology for such exploratory data analysis (Hendry, 1995, 2009) as well as 
                       a general theory for model selection (Hendry and Krolzig, 2005); clustering techniques 
                       such as projection pursuit (e.g. Friedman, 1987) might provide alternatives for the 
                       identification of key relationships and the reduction of complexity on the way from 
                       empirical measurement to theoretical models. Cointegrated VAR models could provide an 
                       avenue towards identification of robust structures within a set of data (Juselius, 2006), for 
                       example, the forces that move equilibria (pushing forces          , which give rise to stochastic trends) 
                       and forces that co   rrect deviations fr om equilibrium ( pulling forces     , which give ri  se to long-run 
                       relations).  Interpreted  in this way, the ‘general-to-specific’ empirical approach has a good 
                       chance of nesting a multivar     iate, path-dependent data-generating process and relevant 
                       dynamic macroeconomic theories.  Unlike approa             ches in which data ar e silenced by prior 
                       restrictions, the Cointegrated VA R model gives the data a rich co         ntext in which    to speak freely 
                       (Hoover et al   ., 2008).  
                        
                       A chain of specification tests and estimated statistical models for simultaneous systems 
                       would provide a benchmark for the subsequent development of tests of models based on 
                       economic behavior: significant and robust relations within a simultaneous system would 
                       provide empirical regularities that one would attempt to explain, while the quality of fit of 
                       the statistical benchmark would offer a confidence band for more ambitious models. 
                       Models that do not reproduce (even) approximately the quality of the fit of statistical 
                       models would have to be rejected (the majority of currently popular macroeconomic and 
                       macro finance models would not pass this test). Again, we see here an aspect of ethical 
                       responsibility of researchers: Economic policy models should be theoretically and 
                       empirically sound. Economists should avoid gi            ving policy recommendations on the base of 
                       models with a weak empirical grounding and should, to the extent possible, make clear to 
                       the public how strong the support of the data is          for their models and the conclusions drawn 
                       from them. 
                        
                        
                        
                        11
                                                The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                                 5.  A Research Agenda to Cope with Financial Fragility 
                            
                           The notion of financial fragility implies that a given system might be more or less 
                           susceptible to produce crises. It seems clear that financial innovations have made the 
                           system more fragile. Apparently, the existing linkages within the worldwide, highly 
                           connected financial markets have generated th                     e spillovers from the U.S. subprime problem 
                           to other layers of the financial system. Many financial innovations had the effect of 
                           creating links between formerly unconnected players. All in all, the degree of connectivity 
                           of the system has probably increased enormously over the last decades. As is well known 
                           from network theory in natural sciences, a more highly connected system might be more 
                           efficient in coping with certain tasks (maybe distributing risk components), but will often 
                           also be more vulnerable to shocks and – systemic failure! The systematic analysis of 
                           network vulnerability has been undertaken in th                     e computer science and operations research 
                           literature (see e.g. Criado et al., 2005). Such aspects have, however, been largely absent 
                           from discussions in financial economics. The introduction of new derivatives was rather 
                           seen through the lens of general equilibrium models: more contingent claims help to 
                           achieve higher efficiency. Unfortunately, the claimed efficiency gains through derivatives 
                           are merely a theoretical implication of a highly                    stylized model and, therefore, have to count 
                           as a hypothesis. Since there is hardly any supporting empirical evidence (or even analysis 
                           of this question), the claimed real-world efficiency gains from derivatives are not justified 
                           by true science. While the economic argument in favor of ever new derivatives is more one 
                           of persuasion rather than evidence, important negative effects have been neglected. The 
                           idea that the system was made less risky with the development of more derivatives led to 
                           financial actors taking positions with extreme degrees of leverage and the danger of this 
                           has not been emphasized enough.  
                            
                           As we have mentioned, one totally neglected area is the degree of connectivity and its 
                           interplay with the stability of the system (see Bo                   esch et al. (2006). We believe that it will be 
                           necessary for supervisory author               ities to develop a perspective  on the network aspects of the 
                           financial system, collect appropriate data, define measures of connectivity and perform 
                           macro stress testing at the system level. In this way, new measures of financial fragility 
                           would be obtained. This would also require                    a new area of accompanying academic research 
                           that looks at agent-based models of the financial system, performs scenario analyses and 
                           develops aggregate risk measures. Network theory and the theory of self-organized 
                           criticality of highly connected systems would be appropriate starting points.  
                            
                           The danger of systemic risk means that regulation has to be extended from individualistic 
                           (regulation of single institutions which of course                   , is still crucial) to     system wide regulation. 
                           In the sort of system which is prone to systemic crisis, regulation also has to have a 
                           systemic perspective. Academic researchers and supervisory authorities thus have to look 
                           into connections within the financial sector and to investigate the repercussions of 
                            12
                                                       The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                                problems within one institute on other parts of the system (even across national borders). 
                                Certainly, before deciding a bout the bail-out of a large bank,  this implies an understanding 
                                of the network. One should know whether its ba                                nkruptcy would lead to widespread domino 
                                effects or whether contagion would be limited. It seems to us that what regulators provide 
                                currently is far from a reliable assessment of such after effects. 
                                 
                                Such analysis has to be supported by more traditional approaches: Leverage of financial 
                                institutions rose to unprecedented levels prior to the crisis, partly by evading Basle II 
                                regulations through special investment vehicles (SIVs). The hedge fund market is still 
                                entirely unregulated. The interplay between leverage, connectivity and system risk needs 
                                to be investigated at the aggregate level. It is highly likely, that extreme leverage levels of 
                                interconnected institutions will be found to impose unacceptable social risk on the public. 
                                Prudent capital requirements would be necessary and would require a solid scientific 
                                investigation of the above aspects rather than a pre-analytic laissez-faire attitude. 
                                 
                                We also have to re-investigate the informational role of financial prices and financial 
                                contracts. While trading in stock markets is usually interpreted as at least in part 
                                transmitting information, this information transmission seems to have broken down in the 
                                case of structured financial products. It seems that securitization has rather led to a loss of 
                                information by anonymous intermediation (often                                   multiple) between borrowers and lenders. 
                                In this way, the informational component has been outsourced to rating agencies and 
                                typically, the buyer of CDO tranches would not have spent any effort himself on 
                                information acquisition concerning his far away counterparts. However, this centralized 
                                information processing instead of the dispersed                               one in traditional credit relationships might 
                                lead to a severe loss of information. As it turned out, standard loan default models failed 
                                dramatically in recent years (Rajan et al, 2008). It should also be noted that the price 
                                system itself can exacerbate the difficulties in the financial market (see Hellwig, 2008). 
                                One of the reasons for the sharp fall in the as                          set valuations of major banks was not only the 
                                loss on the assets on which their derivatives were based, but also the general reaction of the 
                                markets to these assets. As markets became awar                                 e of the risk involved, all such assets were 
                                written down and it was in this way that a small sector of the market “contaminated” the 
                                rest. Large parts of the asset holdings of major banks abruptly lost much of their value. 
                                Thus the price system itself can be destabilizing as expectations change.  
                                 
                                On the macroeconomic level, it would be desirable to develop early warning schemes that 
                                indicate the formation of bubbles. Combinations of indicators with time series techniques 
                                could be helpful in detecting deviations of financial or other prices from their long-run 
                                averages. Indication of structural change (particularly towards non-stationary trajectories) 
                                would be a signature of changes of the behavior of market participants of a bubble-type 
                                nature.    
                                 
                                 13
                                       The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                            
                           6. Conclusions 
                        
                       The current crisis might be characterized as an example of the final stage of a well-known 
                       boom-and-bust pattern that has been repeated so many times in the course of economic 
                       history. There are, nevertheless, some aspects that make this crisis different from its 
                       predecessors: First, the preceding boom had its origin – at least to a large part – in the 
                       development of new financial products that         opened up new investment  possibilities (while 
                       most previous crises were the consequence of overinvestment in new physical investment 
                       possibilities). Second, the global dimension of the current crisis is due to the increased 
                       connectivity of our already highl     y interconnected fina   ncial system. Both aspects have been 
                       largely ignored by academic economics. Research on the origin of instabilities, 
                       overinvestment and subsequent slumps has been considered as an exotic side track from 
                       the academic research agenda (and the curriculum of most economics programs).This, of 
                       course, was because it was incompatible with the premise of the rational representative 
                       agent. This paradigm also made economics blind           with respect to the role   of interactions and 
                       connections between actors (such as the changes in the network structure of the financial 
                       industry brought about by deregulation and introduction of new structured products). 
                       Indeed, much of the work on contagion and herding behavior (see Banerjee, 1992, and 
                       Chamley, 2002) which is closely connected to the network structure of the economy has 
                       not been incorporated into macroeconomic analysis. 
                        
                       We believe that economics has been trapped in a sub-optimal equilibrium in which much of 
                       its research efforts are not directed towards the most prevalent needs of society. 
                       Paradoxically self-reinforcing feedback effects within the profession may have led to the 
                       dominance of a paradigm that has no solid methodological basis and whose empirical 
                       performance is, to say the least, modest. Defining away the most prevalent economic 
                       problems of modern economies and failing to communicate the limitations and 
                       assumptions of its popular models, the economics profession bears some responsibility for 
                       the current crisis. It has failed in its duty to society to provide as much insight as possible 
                       into the workings of the economy and in providing warnings about the tools it created. It 
                       has also been reluctant to emphasize the limitations of its analysis. We believe that the 
                       failure to even envisage the current problems of the worldwide financial system and the 
                       inability of standard macro and finance models to provide any insight into ongoing events 
                       make a strong case for a major reorientation in these areas and a reconsideration of their 
                       basic premises.  
                        
                        14
                                   The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                        References 
                    Allen, F. and A. Babus, 2008, Networks in Finance     . Wharton Financial Institutions Center 
                        Working Paper No. 08-07. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1094883
                    Anderson, P.W., 1972, More is different, Science 177, 393-396.  
                    Aoki, M. and H. Yoshikawa, 2007, Reconstructing Macroeconomics: A Perspective from 
                        Statistical Physics and Combinatorial Stochastic Processes. Cambridge University 
                        Press: Cambridge and New York. 
                    Bagehot, W., 1873, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. Henry S. King 
                        and Co.: London. 
                    Banerjee, A., 1992, A simple model of herd behaviour, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
                        108, 797–817. 
                    Boesch, F. T., F. Harary, and J. A. Kabell, 2006, Graphs as models of communication 
                        network vulnerability: Connectivity and persistence, Networks, 11, 57 - 63. 
                    Brigandt, I. and A. Love, ‘Reductionism in Biology’ in thSe tanford Encyclopedia of 
                        Philosophy. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/reduction-biology/ 
                    Campos, J., N.R. Ericsson and D.F. Hendry, 2005, Editors'General to                                         Introduction to 
                        Specific Modelling, 1 - 81, Edward Elgar: London. 
                    Chamley, C. P., 2002, Rational Herds: Economic Models of Social Learning. Cambridge 
                        University Press: Cambridge. 
                    Coates J.M. and J. Herbert, 2008, Endogenous steroids and financial risk taking on a 
                        London trading floor, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 6167 – 6172.   
                    Cogley, T. and T. Sargent, 2008, The market pric   e of risk and the equity premium: A legacy 
                        of the Great Depression?,  Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 454-476. 
                    Criado, R., J. Flores, B.  Hernández-Bermo, J. Pello, and M. Romej             ance, 2005, Effective 
                        measurement of network vulnerability     under random and intentional attacks   , Journal of 
                        Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms, 4, 307-316. 
                    Eichengreen, B., 2008, Origins and Responses to the Crisis, unpublished manuscript, 
                        University of California, Berkeley. 
                    Föllmer, H., 2008, Financial uncertainty, risk m easures and robust preferences, in: Yor, M, 
                        ed., Aspects of Mathematical Finance, Springer: Berlin. 
                     15
                                        The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
                       Friedman, J., 1987, Exploratory projection pursuit, Journal of the American Statistical 
                           Association, 82, 249-266 
                       Hellwig, M. F., 2008, Systemic Risk in the Financial Sector: An Analysis of the 
                           Subprime-Mortgage Financial Crisis, MPI Collective Goods Preprint, No. 2008/43. 
                       Hendry, D., 2009, The Methodolorical Econometric Modellinggy of Empi: Applied 
                           Econometrics Through the Looking-Glass, forthcoming in                The Handbook of Empirical 
                           Econometrics, Palgrave. 
                       Hendry, D.F., 1995. Dynamic Econometrics. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 
                       Hendry, D.F. and H-M. Krolzig, 2005, The Properties of Autom Gets Modelling, atic
                           Economic Journal, 115, C32--C61.  
                       Hoover, K., S. Johansen, and K. Juselius, 2008, Allowing the data to speak freely: The 
                           macroeconometrics of the cointegrated vector autoregression. American Economic 
                           Review 98, 251-55.  
                       Juselius, K., 2006, The cointegrated VAR model: Econometric Methodology and Empirical 
                           Applications   .  Oxford Universi   ty Press: Oxford. 
                       Juselius, K. and M. Franchi, 2007, Taking a DSGE Model to the Data Meaningfully, 
                           Economics–The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 4.  
                       Kindleberger, C.P., 1989, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. 
                           MacMillan: London.  
                       Krahnen, J.-P. and C. Wilde, 2006, Risk Transfer with CDOs and Systemic Risk in 
                           Banking. Center for Financial Studies, WP 2006-04. Frankfurt. 
                       Krahnen, J.-P., 2005, Der Handel von Kreditrisiken: Eine neue Dimension des 
                           Kapitalmarktes Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik 6,  499 – 519. 
                       Leijonhufvud, A., 2000, Macroeconomic Instability and Coordination: Selected Essays, 
                           Edward Elgar: Cheltenham. 
                       Lo, A., D. V. Repin and B. N. Steenbarger, Fear          and Greed in Financial Markets: A Clinical 
                           Study of Day-Traders, American Economic Review 95, 352-359. 
                       Lux, T. and F. Westerhoff, 2009, Economics crisis, Nature Physics 5, 2 – 3. 
                       Lux, T., 2009, Stochastic Behavioral Asset Pricing Models and the Stylized Facts, chapter 
                           3 in T. Hens and K. Schenk-Hoppé, eds., Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics 
                           and Evolution. North-Holland: Amsterdam,161 – 215.   
                       Minsky, H.P., 1986, Stabilizing an Unstable Economy . Yale University Press: New Haven. 
                        16
                      The Financial Crisis and the Systemic Failure of Academic Economics  
             Rajan, U, A. Seru and V. Vig, 2008,  The Failure of Models that Predict Failure: Distance, 
               Incentives and Defaults. Chicago GSB Research Paper No. 08-19.  
             Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, 2008, This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight 
               Centuries of Financial Crises. Manuscript, Harvard University and NBER. 
             Scheinkman, J. and M. Woodford, 1994, Self-Organized Criticality and Economic 
               Fluctuations, American Economic Review 84 (Papers and Proceedings), 417-421.
              17
