                                                                                                                                                                                           1.04cm spine 
                                                                                                                                                                                           for 208pg on 
                                                                                                                                                                                          90g eco paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                             171                                                                                                                                         FAO     61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FORESTRY      5
                                                                                                171                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAPER     0
                                                                                        FAO FORESTRY PAPER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    171
                                             Edible insects                                                                                                                                                  Edible insects Edible insects 
                                             Future prospects for food and feed security 
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Future prospects for food and feed security Future prospects for food and feed security 
                                             Edible insects have always been a part of human diets, 
                                             but in some societies there remains a degree of disdain                                                                                         Edible insects: future prospects for food and feed security
                                             and disgust for their consumption. Although the majority 
                                             of consumed insects are gathered in forest habitats, 
                                             mass-rearing systems are being developed in many 
                                             countries. Insects offer a signiﬁcant opportunity to merge 
                                             traditional knowledge and modern science to improve 
                                             human food security worldwide.
                                             This publication describes the contribution of insects to 
                                             food security and examines future prospects for raising 
                                             insects at a commercial scale to improve food and feed 
                                             production, diversify diets, and support livelihoods in both 
                                             developing and developed countries. It shows the many 
                                             traditional and potential new uses of insects for direct 
                                             human consumption and the opportunities for and 
                                             constraints to farming them for food and feed. It examines 
                                             the body of research on issues such as insect nutrition and 
                                             food safety, the use of insects as animal feed, and the 
                                             processing and preservation of insects and their products. 
                                             It highlights the need to develop a regulatory framework to 
                                             govern the use of insects for food security. And it presents 
                                             case studies and examples from around the world.
                                             Edible insects are a promising alternative to the 
                                             conventional production of meat, either for direct human 
                                             consumption or for indirect use as feedstock. To fully realize 
                                             this potential, much work needs to be done by a wide range 
                                             of stakeholders. This publication will boost awareness of 
                                             the many valuable roles that insects play in sustaining 
                                             nature and human life, and it will stimulate debate on the 
                                             expansion of the use of insects as food and feed.
                                                              ISBN 978-92-5-107595-1 ISSN 0258-6150
                                                                9  789251075951                                                                                                              FA
                                                                              I3253E/1/04.13                                                                                                 O
