    X-rays final  9/5/01 2:44 pm  Page 9
                        X-rays
                         How safe are they?
                            X-RAY DEPARTMENT
                         Thirty years ago, X-rays were the only way
                            to see what was going on inside your body.
                         Now other methods of medical imaging are
                         available, some using different types of
                         radiation from X-rays. They are briefly described
                         on the next two pages. Patients are sometimes
                         concerned about the possible harmful effects
                         of radiation, so this leaflet goes on to explain
                         the risks and to put them into perspective.
           X-rays final  9/5/01 2:42 pm  Page 2
                     Imaging methods which use X-rays
                     Radiography
                     This is the familiar X-ray which most of us will have had
                          at some time during our lives, usually for looking at
                     broken bones or at the chest or teeth. A machine directs a
                     beam of X-rays through the part of your body that is being
                     examined and on to a special film. A picture is produced
                     on the film of the structures the X-rays have passed
                     through in your body. 
                     Simple radiographs such as these involve extremely low
                     amounts of radiation (as shown in the table on page 5).
                                                      Fluoroscopy
                                                      This is sometimes called ‘screening’. After passing through
                                                           your body, the X-ray beam is viewed by a special camera
                                                      which produces a moving picture on a TV screen. The
                                                      radiologist or radiographer (see definitions at the end of this
                                                      leaflet) performing the examination can take snapshots of any
                                                      important findings, or record the whole thing on video. 
                                                      Fluoroscopy is often used to look at the gut. For example, in a
                                                      ‘barium meal’ you will be asked to swallow a drink of barium,
                                                      which is shown up well by X-rays, to give moving pictures of
                                                      your stomach and intestine. 
                                                      Fluoroscopic examinations usually involve higher radiation 
                                                      doses than simple radiography.
                     Computed tomography (CT) scan
                     This is a more sophisticated way of using X-rays. You
                          lie on a narrow table which passes through a circular
                     hole in the middle of the machine. A fan-shaped beam
                     of X-rays passes through a slice of your body on to a
                     bank of detectors. The X-ray source and the detectors
                     rotate around inside the machine. 
                     An image of the slice is formed by a computer and
                     displayed on a TV screen. You are moved slowly through
                     the hole to take pictures of different slices of your body
                     and sometimes to produce 3D pictures.
                     If many slices are imaged, the          radiation dose can be as 
                     high or higher than that for fluoroscopy.
                                                                               2
                            X-rays final  9/5/01 2:43 pm  Page 7
                                                        Imaging using radioactivity
                                                        Nuclear medicine or isotope scan 
                                                        This is another way of using radiation to produce pictures.
                                                                      Instead of using an X-ray machine, a small amount of
                                                        radioactive material (isotope) is injected into a vein
                                                        (occasionally it is swallowed or inhaled). 
                                                        The radioactive material concentrates in a particular organ or tissue,
                                                        for example in the skeleton for a bone scan. It emits gamma rays,
                                                        which are a type of radiation that behaves like X-rays. A special camera
                                                        detects the gamma rays coming out of your body and builds up a
                                                        picture of what is happening inside you. 
                                                        The radioactivity in your body falls to insignificant levels in a few days. The total radiation
                                                        dose you receive while it is there will be similar to or less than that from fluoroscopy. 
                                                        Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
                                                        These are two of the most exciting advances in medical imaging of the past thirty
                                                                      years. They do not use X-rays or gamma rays and, so far, no ill-effects have been
                                                        seen from ultrasound or from the high magnetic fields used in MRI examinations. 
                                                        So why not use them for all pictures, then there will be no concern about possible
                                                        radiation risks and this leaflet wouldn’t be necessary? The answer is that, although
                                                        they can give beautifully detailed pictures of some parts of the body, they are unable
                                                        to provide useful pictures to replace all types of X-ray examination. Also, MRI
                                                        scanners, being very expensive, are not always available and they cannot be used on
                                                        some patients who have pieces of metal in their body. 
                                                        So, although these new methods are used wherever possible, X-rays and gamma rays
                                                        will be with us for a long time yet.
                                                             Don’t forget the benefits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            If, after reading this leaflet, you are still
                                                             All the methods of medical imaging
                                                                              can bring very real benefits to                                                                                                               concerned about the possible risks from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            having an X-ray examination, ask your
                                                             patients. The overriding concern of your
                                                             doctor and the hospital radiology                                                                                                                              doctor how the information gained will
                                                             department is to ensure that when                                                                                                                              help to improve your treatment. If treat-
                                                             radiation is used, the benefits from making                                                                                                                    ment decisions depend on the findings,
                                                             the right diagnosis, and consequently then the risk to your health from not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            having the examination is likely to be much
                                                             giving you the right treatment, outweigh
                                                             any small risk involved.                                                                                                                                       greater than that from the radiation itself.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
        X-rays final  9/5/01 2:42 pm  Page 4
               X-ray doses in perspective
               We are all exposed to natural
                     background radiation every day of            Natural radiation
               our lives. This comes from the ground and
               building materials around us, the air we                           Cosmic rays
               breathe, the food we eat and even from                                 14%
               outer space (cosmic rays). In most of the
               UK the largest contribution is from radon
               gas which seeps out of the ground and
               accumulates in our houses. 
               Each medical X-ray or nuclear medicine   Radon 
               examination gives us a small additional 58%
               dose on top of this natural background
               radiation. The level of dose varies with 
               the type of examination, ranging from the
               equivalent of a few days of natural                                        Food
               background radiation to a few years, as                                    12%
               shown in the table on page 5.
               The most common X-ray examinations are
               those of the teeth, the chest and the
               limbs. These involve exceedingly small
               doses that are equivalent to only a few
               days of natural background radiation. 
               Examinations involving many X-ray pictures
               and fluoroscopy (eg barium meals or
               barium enemas), CT scans of the body or                Ground 16%
               bone isotope scans, involve higher doses.
               Even these represent only a fraction of our
               lifetime dose from natural radiation. 
               What are the effects of radiation?
               You will be glad to know that the radiation doses used for X-ray examinations or
                  isotope scans are many thousands of times too low to produce immediate harmful
               effects, such as skin burns or radiation sickness. The only effect on the patient that is
               known to be possible at these low doses is a very slight increase in the chance of
               cancer occurring many years or even decades after the exposure. 
               Approximate estimates of the chance or risk that a particular examination or scan
               might result in a radiation-induced cancer later in the lifetime of the patient are shown
               in the last column of the table. 
                                                      4
       X-rays final  9/5/01 2:42 pm  Page 5
             Broad levels of risk for common X-ray
             examinations and isotope scans
                X-ray examination      Equivalent period of     Lifetime additional 
                (Nuclear medicine       natural background        risk of cancer 
                 or isotope scan)            radiation          per examination*
                                                                NEGLIGIBLE RISK
                Chest                                               Less than
                Teeth                       A few days
                Arms and legs                                    1 in 1,000,000
                Hands and feet
                                                                 MINIMAL RISK
                Skull                                            1 in 1,000,000
                Head                       A few weeks                  to      
                Neck                                              1 in 100,000
                                                                 VERY LOW RISK
                Breast [mammography]
                Hip
                Spine                      A few months            1 in 100,000
                Abdomen                         to to
                Pelvis                        a year               1 in 10,000
                CT scan of head
                (Lung isotope scan)
                (Kidney isotope scan)
                                                                   LOW RISK
                Kidneys and bladder [IVU]
                Stomach – barium meal                               1 in 10,000
                Colon – barium enema          A few years                 to 
                CT scan of chest                                     1 in 1,000
                CT scan of abdomen
                (Bone isotope scan)
               * These risk levels represent very small additions to the 1 in 3 chance we all have
               of getting cancer
                                                 5
            X-rays final  9/5/01 2:43 pm  Page 6
                       Radiation risks in perspective
                       Just about everything we do in our daily lives carries some level of risk. We tend to
                            regard activities as being “safe” when the risk of something unpleasant happening
                       falls below a certain level. 
                       The lower the level of risk, the “safer” the activity becomes. For example, most people
                       would regard activities involving a risk of below 1 in 1,000,000 as exceedingly safe.
                       The radiation risks for simple X-ray examinations
                       of the teeth, chest or limbs, can be seen to fall
                       into this negligible risk category (less than 1 in
                       1,000,000 risk).         More complicated examinations 
                       carry a minimal to low risk. 
                       Higher dose examinations such as barium
                       enemas, CT body scans or isotope bone scans
                       fall into the low risk category (1 in 10,000 to 
                       1 in 1,000 risk). As we all have a 1 in 3 chance
                                                                                                    Airline flights are very safe with the risk of
                       of getting cancer even if we never have an X-ray,
                                                                                                    a crash being well below 1 in 1,000,000.
                       these higher dose examinations still represent a
                                                                                                    Incidentally, a four hour flight exposes you
                                                                                                    to the same radiation dose (from cosmic
                       very small addition to this underlying cancer risk
                       from all causes.                                                             rays) as a chest X-ray
                       As long as it is clearly necessary to help make the correct treatment decision for a
                       patient, the      benefits from any X-ray examination or isotope scan should usually
                       outweigh these small radiation risks. It should be remembered that the higher dose
                       examinations are normally used to                  diagnose more serious conditions when a greater
                       benefit to the patient is to be expected. 
                       What is the effect of having many X-rays?
                       Each individual X-ray examination or isotope scan carries the level of
                             risk indicated in the table on page 5. To estimate the effect of
                       having many examinations, the risks for each one are simply
                       added together. It does not make any difference whether you have
                       a number of X-rays in one day or spread over many years, the
                       total risk is just the same. 
                       If you have already had a large number of X-rays and the total risk
                       is causing you concern, the need for each new examination should
                       still be judged on its own merits. Before going ahead, your doctor
                       must be able to reassure you that there is no other way of providing
                       new information that is essential for the effective management of
                       your medical problem. 
                       Make sure your doctor is aware of other X-rays or scans you have
                       had, in case they make additional examinations unnecessary.
                                                                                       6
          X-rays final  9/5/01 2:42 pm  Page 3
                    Radiation risks for older and younger patients
                    As you get older you are more likely to need an X-ray examination. F                      ortunately
                          radiation risks for older people are lower than those shown in the table on page 5.
                    This is because there is less time for a radiation-induced cancer to develop, so the
                    chances of it happening are greatly reduced. 
                    Children, however, with most of their life still ahead of them, may be at twice the risk of
                    middle-aged people from the same X-ray examination. This is why particular attention is
                    paid to ensuring that there is a clear medical benefit for every child who is X-rayed. The
                    radiation dose is also kept as low as possible without detracting from the information
                    the examination can provide.  
                                                                                                                  Please Mum, 
                    A baby in the womb may also be more sensitive to radiation
                                                                                                               tell them I’m here
                    than an adult, so we are particularly careful about X-rays
                    during pregnancy. There is no problem with something like 
                    an X-ray of the hand or the chest because the radiation does
                    not go anywhere near the baby. However, special precautions
                    are required for examinations where the womb is in, or near,
                    the beam of radiation, or for isotope scans where the
                    radioactive material could reach the baby through the
                    mother’s circulating blood. 
                    If you are about to have such an examination and are a
                    woman of childbearing age, the radiographer or radiologist
                    (see definitions on the last page) will ask you if there is any
                    chance of your being pregnant. 
                    If this is a possibility, your case will be discussed with the doctors looking after you to
                    decide whether or not to recommend postponing the investigation. There will be occasions
                    when diagnosing and treating your illness is essential for your health and your unborn child.
-ray or scan may    When this health benefit clearly outweighs the small radiation risks, the X
                    go ahead after discussing all the options with you.
                    Radiation risks for future generations
                    If the reproductive organs (ovaries or testes) are exposed to radiation there is a
                       possibility that hereditary diseases or abnormalities may be passed on to future
                    generations. Although the effect has never been seen in humans, lead-rubber shields
                    can be placed over the ovaries or testes during some X-ray examinations, as a
                    precaution. They are only necessary for examinations of the lower abdomen and thighs
                    on patients who are young enough to have children. Even then, there are some
                    examinations where it is not practicable to use gonad shields since they will obscure
                    important diagnostic information.
                                                                            7
        X-rays final  9/5/01 2:43 pm  Page 8
                Important points to remember
                ➤ In radiology departments, every effort is made to keep radiation doses low and,
                   wherever possible, to use ultrasound or MRI which involve no hazardous radiation.
                ➤ The radiation doses from X-ray examinations or isotope scans are small in relation
                   to those we receive from natural background radiation, ranging from the
                   equivalent of a few days worth to a few years.
                ➤ The health risks from these doses are very small in relation to the underlying risks
                   of cancer, but are not entirely negligible for some procedures involving fluoroscopy
                   or computed tomography (CT).
                ➤ You should make your doctor aware of any other recent X-rays or scans you may
                   have had, in case they make further examinations unnecessary.
                ➤ The risks are much lower for older people and a little higher for children and
                   unborn babies, so extra care is taken with young or pregnant patients.
                ➤ If you are concerned about the possible risks from an investigation using radiation,
                   you should ask your doctor whether the examination is really necessary. If it is,
                   then the risk to your health from not having the examination is likely to be very
                   much greater than that from the radiation itself. 
                 Radiology department staff
                 Radiographers are the health-care          Radiologists are doctors who are
                 professionals who carry out many of        specially trained to decide on the
                 these X-ray examinations and other         appropriate investigation, to carry out
                 imaging procedures. They have              some of the more complex ones and to
                 undergone specialised education            interpret the X-ray pictures or isotope
                 and training to enable them to care scans. They will write a report on your
                 for you and to use the imaging             examination that will be sent back to the
                 equipment safely in all areas of the specialist or GP who asked for your
                 radiology department.                      examination to be done.
                                  This is an information leaflet for patients prepared by the:
                                  National Radiological Protection Boardwww.nrpb.org.uk
                                  College of Radiographers            www.sor.org
                                  Royal College of Radiologists       www.rcr.ac.uk
                                  Royal College of General Practitionerswww.rcgp.org.uk
                                  Produced by NRPB, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0RQ            May 2001
