                                                                       
                                                                                     
                                                                       
                              FAIRLANDS DAY NURSERY, CHURCH ROAD, SHEDFIELD, 
                                                          SOUTHAMPTON,  
                                                     HAMPSHIRE,SO32 2HY. 
                                                         TEL: 01329 834848 
                                              admin@fairlandsnurseryschool.co.uk 
                     Health and Safety Policy 
                     Statement of intent 
                     Fairlands  believes  that  the  health  and  safety  of  children  is  of  paramount 
                     importance.  We make our setting a safe and healthy place for children, parents, 
                     staff and volunteers.   
                      
                     Aim 
                     We aim to make children, parents and staff aware of health and safety issues 
                     and to minimise the hazards and risks to enable the children to thrive in a healthy 
                     and safe environment. 
                      
                     Methods 
                     The members of staff responsible for health and safety are Jo Skinner and Carol 
                     Plumpton,  they  are  competent  to  carry  out  these  responsibilities.  They  have 
                     undertaken health and safety training and regularly update their knowledge and 
                     understanding.    We  display  the  necessary  health  and  safety  poster  in  the 
                     Nursery. 
                      
                     Risk assessment 
                     Our risk assessment process includes: 
                        checking for hazards and risks indoors and outside, and in our activities and 
                         procedures. Our assessment covers adults and children; 
                        deciding which areas need attention;  
                        developing an action plan that specifies the action required, the timescales for 
                         action, the person responsible for the action and any funding required. 
                      
                                                                    (1) 
                     We maintain lists of health and safety issues, which are checked: 
                        daily before the session begins;  
                        annually - when a full risk assessment is carried out.  
                      
                     Insurance cover 
                     We  have  public  liability  insurance  and  employers'  liability  insurance.    The 
                     certificate for public liability insurance is displayed in the office. 
                      
                     Awareness raising 
                        Our induction training for staff and volunteers includes a clear explanation of 
                         health and safety issues so that all adults are able to adhere to our policy and 
                         understand their shared responsibility for health and safety.  The induction 
                         training covers matters of employee well-being, including safe lifting and the 
                         storage of potentially dangerous substances. 
                        Records  are  kept  of  these  induction  training  sessions  and  new  staff  and 
                         volunteers are asked to sign the records to confirm that they have taken part 
                         and read all nursery policies. 
                        Health and safety is discussed regularly at staff meetings. 
                        We have a no smoking policy. 
                        Children are made aware of health and safety issues through discussions, 
                         planned activities and routines. 
                      
                     Children's safety 
                        We ensure all staff employed have been checked for criminal records by an 
                         enhanced disclosure from the Disclosure and Barring Service. 
                        All children are supervised by adults at all times. 
                        Whenever children are on the premises at least two adults must be present. 
                        We comply with Statutory requirements regarding ratios of adults to children. 
                      
                     Security 
                        Systems are in place for the safe arrival and departure of children. The times 
                         of the children's arrivals and departures are recorded. 
                        The arrival and departure times of adults - staff, volunteers and visitors - are 
                         recorded. 
                        The personal possessions of staff and volunteers are securely stored during 
                         sessions. 
                      
                                                                    (2) 
                                                                       
                     Kitchen 
                        Children do not have unsupervised access to the kitchen. 
                        All surfaces are clean and non-porous. 
                        There are separate facilities for hand-washing and for washing up. 
                        Cleaning materials and other dangerous materials are stored out of children's 
                         reach. 
                        When children take part in cooking activities, they: 
                         -   are supervised at all times; 
                         -   are kept away from hot surfaces and hot water;  
                         -   do not have unsupervised access to electrical equipment. 
                      
                     Electrical/gas equipment 
                        All electrical/gas equipment conforms to safety requirements and is checked 
                         regularly.  
                        Fires, heaters, electric sockets, wires and leads are properly guarded and the 
                         children are taught not to touch them. 
                        There are sufficient sockets to prevent overloading. 
                        The temperature of hot water is controlled to prevent scalds.  
                        Lighting and ventilation is adequate in all areas including storage areas. 
                      
                     Storage 
                        All  equipment,  materials  and  resources  are  stored  or  stacked  safely  to 
                         prevent them accidentally falling or collapsing. 
                      
                     Outdoor area 
                        Our outdoor area is securely fenced. 
                        Our outdoor area is checked for safety and cleared of rubbish before it is 
                         used. 
                        Adults and children are alerted to the dangers of poisonous plants, herbicides 
                         and pesticides. 
                        Where water can form a pool on equipment, it is emptied before children start 
                         playing outside. 
                        Our outdoor sand pit is covered when not in use and is cleaned regularly. 
                        All outdoor activities are supervised at all times. 
                      
                                                                       
                                                                    (3) 
                     Hygiene 
                        We regularly seek information from the Environmental Health Department and 
                         the  Health  Authority  to  ensure  that  we  keep  up  to  date  with  the  latest 
                         recommendations. 
                        Our daily routines encourage the children to learn about personal hygiene. 
                        We have a daily cleaning routine for the setting which includes play room(s), 
                         kitchen, rest area, toilets and nappy changing areas. 
                        The toilet area has a high standard of hygiene including hand washing and 
                         drying facilities and the disposal of nappies. 
                        We implement good hygiene practices by: 
                         -   cleaning tables between activities; 
                         -   checking toilets regularly; 
                         -   wearing protective clothing - such as aprons and disposable gloves - as 
                             appropriate; 
                         -   providing sets of clean clothes; 
                         -   providing tissues and wipes;  
                      
                     Activities 
                        Before purchase or loan, equipment and resources are checked to ensure 
                         that they are safe for the ages and stages of the children currently attending 
                         the setting.  
                        The layout of play equipment allows adults and children to move safely and 
                         freely between activities.  
                        All  equipment  is  regularly  checked  for  cleanliness  and  safety  and  any 
                         dangerous items are repaired or discarded. 
                        All materials - including paint and glue - are non-toxic. 
                        Sand is clean and suitable for children's play. 
                        Physical play is constantly supervised. 
                        Children are taught to handle and store tools safely. 
                        Children  learn  about  health,  safety  and  personal  hygiene  through  the 
                         activities we provide and the routines we follow.  
                      
                     Food and drink 
                        Staff  who  prepare  and  handle  food  receive  appropriate  training  and 
                         understand - and comply with - food safety and hygiene regulations. 
                        All food and drink is stored appropriately. 
                      
                                                                    (4) 
                      
                        All hot drinks provided must be in lidded thermos cups. 
                        Snack and meal times are appropriately supervised and children do not walk 
                         about with food and drinks. 
                        Fresh drinking water is available to the children at all times. 
                        We operate systems to ensure that children do not have access to food/drinks 
                         to which they are allergic. 
                        We are a nut free nursery. 
                      
                     Outings and visits 
                        We have agreed procedures for the safe conduct of outings.  
                        Parents always sign consent forms before major outings. 
                        A risk assessment is carried out before an outing takes place. 
                        Our adult to child ratio is high. 
                        Children are assigned to individual staff to ensure each child is individually 
                         supervised and to ensure no child gets lost and that there is no unauthorised 
                         access to children. 
                        Outings are recorded in an outings record book stating: 
                         -   the date and item of outing 
                         -   the venue and mode of transport 
                         -   names of staff assigned to named children 
                         -   time of return 
                        Staff take a mobile phone on outings, and supplies of tissues, wipes, pants 
                         etc as well as a mini first aid pack and water. The amount of equipment will 
                         vary and be consistent with the venue and the number of children as well as 
                         how long they will be out for. 
                        Records  are  kept  of  the  vehicles  used  to  transport  children,  with  named 
                         drivers and appropriate insurance cover. 
                      
                     Missing child 
                     If a child goes missing from the setting 
                        The person in charge will carry out a thorough search of the building and 
                         garden. 
                        The register is checked to make sure no other child has also gone astray. 
                        Doors and gates are checked to see if there has been a breach of security 
                         whereby a child could wander out. 
                      
                                                                    (5) 
                        Person in charge talks to staff  to establish what happened.  
                        If  the  child  is  not  found  the  parent  is  contacted  and  the  missing  child  is 
                         reported to the police. 
                      
                     If  a  child  goes  missing  from  an  outing  where  parents  are  not  attending  and 
                     responsible for their own child, the setting ensures that there is a procedure that 
                     is followed. 
                        As soon as it is noticed that a child is missing, staff on the outing ask children 
                         to stand with their designated person and carry out a headcount to ensure 
                         that no other child has gone astray. One staff searches the immediate vicinity 
                         but does not search beyond that. 
                        Staff  take the remaining children back to the setting. 
                        The person in charge of the setting contacts the child's parent who makes 
                         their way to the setting or outing venue as agreed with the person in charge.  
                        The staff contact the police using the mobile phone and report the child as 
                         missing. 
                        In an indoor venue, the staff contact the venue's security who will handle the 
                         search and contact the police if the child is not found. 
                      
                     The investigation 
                        The management carries out a full  investigation  taking  written  statements 
                         from all the staff present at the time, or who were on the outing. 
                        The key person/ staff writes an incident report detailing:  
                         -   the date and time of the report; 
                         -   what staff/ children were in the group/outing; 
                         -   when the child was last seen in the group/outing; 
                         -   what has taken place in the group/outing since then;  
                         -   the time it is estimated that the child went missing. 
                        A conclusion is drawn as to how the breach of security happened. 
                        If the incident warrants a police investigation all staff co-operate fully. In this 
                         case,  the  police  will  handle  all  aspects  of  the  investigation,  including  the 
                         interviewing of staff. Social Services may be involved if it seems likely that 
                         there is a child protection issue to address. 
                        The incident is reported under RIDDOR arrangements and is recorded in the 
                         incident  book;  the  local  authority  health  and  safety  officer  may  want  to 
                         investigate and will decide if there is a case for prosecution. 
                        OFSTED is informed. 
                        The Insurance Department at the Pre-School Learning Alliance is informed. 
                      
                                                                    (6) 
                     Animals  
                      
                        Animals visiting the setting are free from disease and safe to be with children, 
                         and do not pose a health risk. 
                        Our setting's pets are free from disease, safe to be with children, and do not 
                         pose a health risk. 
                        Children wash their hands after contact with animals. 
                        Outdoor footwear worn to visit farms are cleaned of mud and debris and 
                         should not be worn indoors. 
                      
                     Fire safety 
                      
                        Fire  doors  are  clearly  marked,  never  obstructed  and  easily  opened  from 
                         inside. 
                        Smoke  detectors/alarms  and  firefighting  appliances  conform  to  BSEN 
                         standards, are fitted in appropriate high risk areas of the building and are 
                         checked as specified by the manufacturer. 
                        Our  emergency  evacuation  procedures  are  approved  by  the  Fire  Safety 
                         Officer and are: 
                         -   clearly displayed in the premises; 
                         -   explained to new members of staff, volunteers and parents;  
                         -   practiced regularly at least once every six weeks. 
                        Records are kept of fire drills and the servicing of fire safety equipment. 
                          
                     First aid and medication 
                     At least one member of staff with current first aid training is on the premises or on 
                     an outing at any one time. The first aid qualification includes first aid training for 
                     infants and young children.  
                     Our first aid kit: 
                        complies with the Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981; 
                        is regularly checked and re-stocked as necessary; 
                        is easily accessible to adults;  
                        is kept out of the reach of children. 
                     At the time of admission to the setting, parents’ written permission for emergency 
                     medical  advice  or  treatment  is  sought.  Parents  sign  and  date  their  written 
                     approval. 
                      
                                                                       
                                                                    (7) 
                     Slips and Trips 
                            All staff to wear appropriate footwear and sign a footwear disclaimer which 
                             is kept in their file. 
                            All spillages to be cleared up immediately. 
                            When  dealing  with  bodily  fluids  protective  clothing  to  be  worn  and 
                             appropriate antibacterial cleaning undertaken. 
                          
                     Accident folders: 
                        are kept safely and are accessible in the office 
                        all staff and volunteers know where they are kept and how to complete them  
                        are reviewed at least half termly to identify any potential or actual hazards. 
                     Ofsted is notified of any injury requiring an ambulance, treatment by a general 
                     practitioner or hospital doctor, or the death of a child or adult. 
                     When there is any injury requiring general practitioner or hospital treatment to a 
                     child, parent, volunteer or visitor or where there is a death of a child or adult on 
                     the premises, we make a report to the Health and Safety Executive using the 
                     format for the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences. 
                      
                     Dealing with incidents 
                     We meet our legal requirements for the safety of our employees by complying 
                     with  RIDDOR  (the  Reporting  of  Injury,  Disease  and  Dangerous  Occurrences 
                     Regulations). We report to the Health and Safety Executive: 
                        any accident to a member of staff requiring treatment by a general practitioner 
                         or hospital 
                        any  dangerous  occurrences.  This  may  be  an  event  that  causes  injury  or 
                         fatalities or an event that does not cause an accident but could have done, 
                         such as a gas leak.  
                        Any dangerous occurrence is recorded in our Incident Book. See below. 
                      
                     Our Incident Book 
                        We keep an incident book for recording incidents including those that are 
                         reportable to the Health and Safety Executive as above. 
                        These incidents include: 
                         -   break in, burglary, theft of personal or the setting’s property 
                         -   fire, flood, gas leak or electrical failure 
                         -   attack on member of staff or parent on the premises or near by 
                         -   any racist incident involving a staff or family on the centre’s premises 
                      
                                                                    (8) 
                              -    death of a child, and 
                              -    a terrorist attack, or threat of one. 
                             In the incident book we record the date and time of the incident, nature of the 
                              event, who was affected, what was done about it – or if it was reported to the 
                              police, and if so a crime number. Any follow up, or insurance claim made, 
                              should also be recorded. 
                             In  the  unlikely  event  of  a  terrorist  attack  we  follow  the  advice  of  the 
                              emergency services with regard to evacuation, medical aid and contacting 
                              children’s families. Our standard Bomb Evacuation Procedure will be followed 
                              and staff will take charge of their key children. The incident is recorded when 
                              the threat is averted. 
                             In the unlikely event of a child dying on the premises, the emergency services 
                              are called, and the advice of these services are followed. 
                             The incident book is not for recording issues of concern involving a child. This 
                              is recorded in the child’s own file.                                        
                          
                         Administration of medication 
                             Only  prescribed  medication  may  be  administered.  It  must  be  in-date  and 
                              prescribed for the current condition. 
                             Children  taking  prescribed  medication  must  be  well  enough  to  attend  the 
                              setting. 
                             Children's prescribed drugs are stored in their original containers, are clearly 
                              labelled and are inaccessible to the children. 
                             Parents  give  prior  written  permission  for  the  administration  of  medication.  
                              This states the name of the child, name/s of parent(s), date the medication 
                              starts,  the  name  of  the  medication  and  prescribing  doctor,  the  dose  and 
                              times, or how and when the medication is to be administered. 
                             The administration is recorded accurately each time it is given and is signed 
                              by staff. Parents sign the record book to acknowledge the administration of a 
                              medicine. 
                             If  the  administration  of  prescribed  medication requires medical knowledge, 
                              individual training is provided for the relevant member of staff by a health 
                              professional. 
                               
                         Sickness 
                         Our policy for the exclusion of ill or infectious children is discussed with parents.  
                         This includes procedures for contacting parents - or other authorised adults - if a 
                         child becomes ill while in the setting. 
                             We do not provide care for children, who are unwell, have a temperature, or 
                              sickness and diarrhea, or who have an infectious disease. 
                                                                                        
                                                                                   (9) 
                        Children with head lice are not excluded, but must be treated to remedy the 
                         condition.  
                        Parents are notified if there is a case of head lice in the setting via a letter. 
                        Parents are notified if there is an infectious disease, such as chicken pox. 
                        HIV  (Human  Immunodeficiency  Virus)  may  affect  children  or  families 
                         attending the setting. Staff may or may not be informed about it.  
                        Children or families are not excluded because of HIV.  
                        Good hygiene practice concerning the clearing of any spilled bodily fluids is 
                         carried out at all times. 
                        All nappies are disposed of separately in the yellow bin. 
                        Ofsted is notified of any infectious diseases that a qualified medical person 
                         considers notifiable. 
                        We follow  the  guidelines  provided  by  the  Health  Protection  Agency  with 
                         regard to illness and infection. 
                      
                     Safety of adults 
                        Adults are provided with guidance about the safe storage, movement, lifting 
                         and erection of large pieces of equipment. 
                        When adults need to reach up to store equipment or to change light bulbs 
                         they are provided with safe equipment to do so.  
                        All warning signs are clear and in appropriate languages. 
                        Instructions given to all staff on safe erection of Ladders. (see Ladder check 
                         chart in store room) 
                        Adults do not remain in the building on their own or leave on their own after 
                         dark. 
                        The sickness of staff and their involvement in accidents is recorded.  The 
                         records are reviewed termly to identify any issues that need to be addressed.  
                        If a member of staff is off work for more than 3 days due to an accident at 
                         work (not a finger or toe) Ofsted must be informed. 
                      
                     Records 
                      
                     We keep records of: 
                     Adults 
                        names and addresses of all staff on the premises, including temporary staff 
                         who work with the children or who have substantial access to them; 
                        names and addresses of the owners; 
                      
                                                                      (10) 
                                                                       
                        all  records  relating  to  the  staff's  employment  with  the  setting,  including 
                         application forms, references, results of checks undertaken etc. 
                        the times of attendance of staff, volunteers and visitors; 
                          
                     Children 
                        names, addresses and telephone numbers of parents and adults authorised 
                         to collect children from setting; 
                        the names, addresses and telephone numbers of emergency contacts in case 
                         of  children's illness or accident; 
                        the allergies, dietary requirements and illnesses of individual children; 
                        the times of attendance of children; 
                        accidents and medicine administration records; 
                        consents for outings, administration of medication, emergency treatment and 
                         incidents. 
                                                               
                     In addition, the following procedures and documentation in relation to health and 
                     safety are in place: 
                        Risk assessment. 
                        Identity of Visitors recorded. 
                        Fire safety procedures. 
                        Fire safety records and certificates. 
                        Operational procedures for outings. 
                        Manual handling policy. 
                        Food and drink policy. 
                        Staff qualification list for health and safety responsibilities. 
                        Administration of medication. 
                        Prior parental consent to administer medicine. 
                        Record of the administration of medicines. 
                        Prior parental consent for emergency treatment. 
                        Accident record. 
                        Sick children. 
                        No smoking. 
                      
                      
                                                                    (11) 
                               This policy was adopted at Fairland’s Day Nursery on 
                                
                               ………………………….. 
                                
                               Signed on behalf of the Management Committee/ Proprietor 
                                
                               ………………………….. 
                                
                               Role of signatory (e.g.chairperson etc.) 
                                
                               ………………………….. 
                                
                               This policy was amended on 
                                
                               …………………………..(date) 
                                
                                
                               …………………………..(date) 
                                
                                
                               …………………………..(date) 
                                
                                
                                                                                                        
                                       
                                                                                                        
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                    (12) 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
