       Acute Kidney Injury 
       Patient Lealfet
                Who is this for? 
              This lealfet is for people  
              who have been told that  
            they have had Acute Kidney  
           Injury and it’s been designed  
              to answer questions you  
               may wish to ask about  
                    this condition
       What is Acute Kidney Injury?
       ‘Acute’ is a term used to describe                                               1.  
       something that has occurred over                                           They remove  
       hours or days.                                                          waste products and 
                                                                              toxins from the body, 
       ‘Kidney Injury’ describes evidence of                                   including drugs, by 
       damage to the kidneys usually with a                                        making urine
       change in the kidney function. 
                                                            5.                                                      2. 
                                                      They make a                                           They control lfuid 
                                                     hormone called                                          balance, making 
                                                     erythropoietin,               How can                 sure that we are not 
       The best ways to assess                    which stimulates the            you assess                 overloaded with  
                                                    production of red         kidney function?               water or too dry
       kidney function in the short                    blood cells.
       term is to measure a waste                                             The kidneys perform  
       product in the blood called                                              5 important tasks  
                                                                                  for the body:
       creatinine and also to assess 
       urine output.
                                                                       4.                                 3. 
                                                                  They make                     They control blood 
                                                              vitamin D, keeping                pressure, keeping it  
                                                               our bones strong                  at the right level for 
                                                                                                   body functions
   How do doctors know that I have had Acute Kidney Injury?
   You have probably had a recent illness where you were unable to drink or 
    eat properly, for example gastroenteritis, or after an operation. Your blood 
   pressure may have been low and you had low urine output. 
   You will have had a blood test, which showed an increase in the level of 
   creatinine, and from this the doctors will decide if you have had Acute  
   Kidney Injury. Your urine will also have been tested as this may show  
   damage with blood or protein in the test result.  
    
   Can anything make this worse?
   Taking some tablets or medicines can make the situation worse. The family of 
   medicines which are most associated with this are called ‘non-steroidal  
   anti-inlfammatory drugs’ (NSAIDs). The one most commonly used is ibuprofen, 
   others include naproxen and diclofenac. These drugs reduce the blood supply to 
   the kidneys, which can make Acute Kidney Injury worse.
   All medicines which lower blood pressure, including diuretics (known as water 
   tablets, such as Furosemide, Bumetamide and Spironolactone), can also make 
   things worse and will usually be stopped when you are unwell. 
   Some tablets and medicines also have a direct toxic effect on the kidneys if your 
   kidneys are not able to remove them from your blood, and these may also need 
   to be stopped for a short while.
   It is important that you understand which of your regular medicines may have 
   an impact on your kidney function. 
    
   If you have diabetes
   Some people have poor control of their diabetes when they are unwell and may 
   need to start treatment with insulin. Many medications used to treat diabetes are 
   removed from the body by the kidneys and so the levels can build up in the blood 
   if the kidneys are not functioning properly, with the risk of side effects. 
   This particularly applies to Metformin and a family of medications called 
   Sulphonylureas which include glibenclamide, glipizide and gliclazide. 
    
   Will my kidneys be damaged for ever?
   With prompt treatment you may only have suffered mild kidney damage called 
   Stage 1 Acute Kidney Injury. If you had healthy kidneys before the illness and  
   no underlying health problems it is likely that your kidney function will  
   improve and you should have no lasting problems. 
   If you were particularly unwell however, and had severe  
   changes, then although you should have an improvement  
   in your kidney function, it may not return to normal.
   This is particularly an issue if you have previous evidence  
   of kidney problems known as ‘Chronic Kidney Disease’.  
   More severe Acute Kidney Injury is called Stage 2 or 3. 
       What do I need to do next?
       If you have more questions to ask about Acute Kidney Injury you should make an 
       appointment to discuss these with your doctor. Your doctor will arrange follow 
       up blood tests to assess the recovery of your kidney function. You can ask for the 
       blood test results and see how they change. You should also ask to have your blood 
       pressure checked. Your medications should be reviewed and the doses may need to 
       be adjusted. You may be warned about the use of ibuprofen and other non-steroidal 
       anti-inlfammatory drugs. 
        
       Can I do anything to help things improve? 
       Our kidneys are very hard working organs and it is only when they  
       fall below 10% eiffciency that they may need help such as dialysis.
       There are important things, which you can do at an earlier stage to help them.
       This involves healthy living with a healthy weight, avoiding salt  
       or low salt alternatives in your diet and not smoking. 
       If you have diabetes or high blood pressure having good control can help  
       stabilise kidney function and your doctor or nurse can advise you about this.
       If you have been taking regular anti-inlfammatory medication this  
       will be reviewed and you may be offered alternative treatment. 
        
       What if there is still evidence of kidney damage?
       If your blood tests show that your kidney function is less than 60% eiffcient at 
       least 3 months after your illness (known as eGFR less than 60), then this is known 
       as Chronic Kidney Disease. Here Chronic means more than 3 months. Your GP 
       will identify this and you will be included on a register in your GP’s practice. It is 
       important that you have your blood pressure and urine checked at least once a year 
       for this condition. You may also be at increased risk of suffering another episode of 
       Acute Kidney Injury. 
        
       Can I avoid this happening again?
       If you are unwell and unable to drink properly, particularly if you are losing extra lfuid 
       through vomiting or diarrhoea, or you have a high temperature and sweats, then it 
       is important that you discuss your condition with a medical professional. This may 
       be your GP or a specialist nurse, for example a heart failure or kidney nurse if you 
       have one. You may be advised to stop taking medications which lower your blood 
       pressure and a blood test will be arranged to check your kidney function. If you are 
       admitted to hospital for a specialist x-ray or operation, you should make your health 
       care team aware you have had Acute Kidney Injury.
       If you are only passing small amounts of urine you may need admission to hospital.
       Please do not delay calling your GP if this occurs. 
        
       Where can I ifnd out more?
       NHS England has developed a very helpful website called Think Kidneys. You will be         This lealfet has been 
                                                                                                  written by Dr Kathryn 
       able to read the stories of other people who have had this problem and see what            Griiffth who is the 
       medical professionals are doing to learn more and reduce the risks of this condition.      Kidney Care Champion 
       The British Kidney Patient Association has lots of information and support for kidney      of the Royal College of 
                                                                                                  General Practitioners, 
       patients. It has a counselling service and offers advocacy and direct grants, as well as   and it is supported by 
       funding patient-centred research, healthcare professionals and projects.                   the British Kidney Patient 
       www.thinkkidneys.nhs.uk                                                                    Association and Think 
                                                                                                  Kidneys.
       www.britishkidney-pa.co.uk
