                                                                        
       This information is intended to be a brief introduction to the subject. Legal information is provided 
           for guidance only and should not be regarded as an authoritative statement of the law. 
       
      Leaflet 4                                     February 2016 
                                        
                           Induction Programme 
                                        
      Once the employee starts working for you, you have a duty of care towards 
      them. This includes making sure they can do the job both safely and 
      competently. The best way to ensure this is through a structured induction 
      programme. 
      Induction will help new staff to: 
          establish themselves quickly in their job and therefore maximise their 
           productivity  
          become motivated to do well and fit into the business early on 
          understand any health and safety issues relating to their job - this will 
           not only help to reduce accidents at work but also help you ensure that 
           you are meeting your duty of care obligations under the health and safety 
           legislation  
          understand your business' culture  
      Investing time in this process will give new workers a good grounding and help 
      them make fewer mistakes in the long run. The highest level of staff turnover is 
      among newer workers so it is important that the early period spent with your 
      business leaves a good impression on them. 
       
       
       
                                                                      1 
                                        
    Preparing for an induction 
    Preparation is the key to a good induction. 
     
    Before the worker starts 
        Tell other people that there's a new starter, prepare their working area, 
       organise any equipment necessary and have any documentation ready for 
       them to read.  
        Consider providing them with an information pack about the job before 
       they begin work  
        Prepare an induction checklist including all the items that need to be 
       covered and what needs to be done when. You can plan for the induction 
       to be spread over a period of days or weeks depending on the nature of 
       the job.  
        Make sure that the key people who will be involved in the induction 
       process have been briefed.  
        Arrange in advance any instruction or training courses needed - eg on your 
       IT systems.  
    Once the worker starts 
        Ensure that when they arrive they are made to feel welcome.  
        Get one person, ideally their line manager, to take care of a new starter 
       throughout the first day.  
        Make sure they know how any office machinery works, and the location of 
       commonly used facilities - eg the post room, stationery store 
       and lavatories.  
        It is a good idea to get new workers to complete some kind of work on 
       their first day. This can help them relate what they are learning to their 
       job.  
        Include informal aspects such as whether the tea, coffee and biscuits are 
       free or whether there is a kitty.  
        Ask for feedback during and after the process to check that you haven't 
       missed anything. You might want to give the new starter a checklist and 
       ask them to sign it to show it has been completed.  
    What to include in an induction programme 
    You should provide information to a new worker at a rate that allows them to 
    understand it properly. Explain what the business does and how they fit in. 
    You may like to arrange sessions with different members of staff so they can 
    explain their role in relation to the business' activities. General areas to cover 
    include: 
                                              2 
                           
    Administration 
    You may need to provide the worker with: 
        a copy of any procedures and handbooks  
        details of any occupational pension scheme  
        any uniforms and standard equipment they will use  
    Terms and conditions of employment 
    It is a legal requirement for employers to give their employees a written 
    statement of terms and conditions of employment within two months of starting 
    work, except for those employees who will be working for less than one month. 
    [See Leaflet 6] 
    It is a good idea to go through this during the induction and give them details of 
    issues such as: 
        hours of work - including breaks  
        sickness and holiday procedures  
        disciplinary and grievance procedures  
     
    Health and safety 
    You are legally required to provide workers with any health and safety 
    information they need to carry out their job safely. Provide them with a copy of 
    the business' health and safety policy and get them to sign it once they have 
    read it. 
    You must inform them - preferably on the first day - of fire safety procedures 
    and what to do if the fire alarm sounds. If there are particular hazards - eg in a 
    factory or on a building site - you must ensure that new workers are made aware 
    of them and what precautions need to be taken. 
    If their job involves the use or operation of machinery, you must ensure that 
    they are properly trained, that they understand any associated risks, and that 
    they have appropriate safety equipment. 
     
    Tour of the premises 
    Show new workers where they will be working and the location of any facilities. 
     
    Introduction to colleagues 
    Introduce new workers to their team colleagues in turn, for example to: 
        their line manager  
        those responsible for human resources and/or training  
        the health and safety officer  
                                              3 
                           
        trade union or employee representatives  
     
    Introduction to the job 
    You should take them through what their job entails and how this fits in with 
    the rest of the business. 
     
    Equipment 
    Make sure the worker knows how to operate any equipment they will be using 
    and show them where spares, replacements and other materials they may need 
    are kept. 
    For further advice on Recruitment selection and induction see the Agency 
    guide - Advice on recruitment, selection and induction. 
     
    Where can I get more information? 
                           
    The Agency Helpline 028 9032 1442 gives free advice on employment matters. 
     
                                              4 
                           
