                                                                  
                                        
                                        
             
       OUR HOLOCAUST 
             
             
       By Amir Gutfruend 
             
       Translated by Jessica Cohen 
             
       First published in Hebrew by Kinneret, 2001 
             
       English translation published by The Toby Press, 2006 
             
                                                
             
             
            ABOUT THE BOOK: 
             
                          This  novel  is  the  story  of Amir and his cousin Effi, two Israeli 
            children growing up in the Haifa suburbs in the 1970s who try to make sense 
            of the impact of the Holocaust on their family. The children of survivors, Amir 
            and Effi are repeatedly told that they are not “Old Enough” to understand what 
            went on “Over There.” But the cousins are obsessed with understanding: 
            They read library books, ask questions, snoop around, and read old letters, 
            piecing together whatever they can. Their primary sources of information 
            include an eccentric circle of relatives and acquaintances: penny-pinching 
            Grandpa Lolek, Attorney Perl of the hardware store, and Gershon Klima the 
            sewer cleaner. As time passes, Amir and Effi pursue their own lives: Amir gets 
            married and has a son of his own, and Effi goes on to become a doctor. This 
            book, which flashes forward and back between childhood and adulthood, 
            offers a penetrating exploration of the impact of the Shoah on Israeli society 
            and on childhood consciousness.  
             
             
            ABOUT THE AUTHOR: 
             
                 Amir Gutfruend was born in Haifa in 1963. After studying applied 
            mathematics at the Technion, he joined the Israeli Air Force. Our Holocaust 
            was his first novel. It was awarded the Buchman Prize by Yad Vashem. His 
            second novel, Shoreline Mansions, won the Sapir Prize in 2003, and his third 
            novel, The World, a Little Later, was recently published in Israel. Gutfreund 
            lives in the Galilee with his wife, a clinical psychologist, and their two children. 
             
             
             
             
             
                                                                     1
              www.makomisrael.org
            
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                
                               QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION:  
                                     1.  Amir Gutfruend has said, “Even if I write an instruction manual for a 
                                           washing machine, it will always contain humor, and it will always 
                                           contain the Holocaust. It's a part of me." How do you see this 
                                           statement reflected in this thinly-veiled autobiographical novel? 
                                      
                                     2.  There are several subterranean images in this novel, from the sewers 
                                           that Gershon Klima cleans to the cellar of Grandpa Lolek’s home. What 
                                           do these underground areas signify in this story? Why are Amir and Effi 
                                           so eager to excavate them? 
                                
                                     3.  What is the "Law of Compression"? How does it serve as a response to 
                                           the Holocaust?  
                                
                                     4.  Gutfruend describes two Shoahs: the public one declaimed at school 
                                           ceremonies by means of a siren, and the private one that involves his 
                                           extended family (p. 49). What is the difference between the two 
                                           Shoahs? What do they both have in common? How does this concept 
                                           shed light on the meaning of the book's title?  
                                
                                     5. Gutfruend writes, "The Holocaust extended its reach beyond the 
                                           neighborhood. Traces of Shoah lurked in the most surprising places, 
                                           like the little shops where Dad went to order wallpaper or buy light 
                                           bulbs" (p. 85). What does he mean in saying that traces of the Shoah 
                                           lurked in surprising places? Can you think of some examples in the 
                                           book? Do you think the Shoah lurks as noticeably in America as it does 
                                           in the Israel the Gutfruend describes? Why or why not?  
                                
                                     6.  In speaking of the period when he was finally Old Enough, Gutfreund 
                                           comments, "We did not abandon the Shoah but we bundled it up into 
                                           one single day like everyone else did. Holocaust Remembrance Day. 
                                           Like a pile of leaves neatly raked" (p. 156). Do you think he is being 
                                           critical of Holocaust Remembrance Day? How do you feel about this 
                                           institution?  
                                
                                     7.  In telling his war story, Grandpa Yosef comments, "Today I am Shoah-
                                           smart, you could say, and I know that people like Adler were marked 
                                           men from the beginning. Who would live? Who would die? Was there 
                                           any way to predict? That's not what I'm saying. But there were those 
                                           whose fate was marked on them from the beginning. The brazen would 
                                           live, the pure would die" (p. 258). What does Grandpa Yosef mean by 
                                           "Shoah-smart"? Do you think this is something of which he is proud? Is 
                                           there any point to being "Shoah-smart" after the war is long over? 
                                
                                      
                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                  www.makomisrael.org
                              
                                                                                                                                                
                                 
                           
                               8.  When Grandpa Yosef alludes to Yariv while telling his story, Gutfruend 
                                    remarks parenthetically, "Suddenly, my Yariv, in the middle of the 
                                    camps" (p. 263). Gutfreund's son Yariv was of course born many years 
                                    after the war was over. So what does Gutfreund mean by this 
                                    comment? How does it relate to the title of the book?  
                           
                               9.  What is the difference in opinion between Gutfreund and Attorney Perl 
                                    regarding the proper way to treat war criminals? Which side do you 
                                    agree with, and why? 
                           
                               10. Gutfreund says that the people he most hates are those who were only 
                                    doing their jobs – those who did not actually hate Jews (p. 364). Why 
                                    are these individuals the most loathsome to him?  
                           
                               11. What is Gutfreund's reaction to the German washing machine that his 
                                    wife brings home (see p. 373)? Are you familiar with this practice of 
                                    boycotting German products? How do you feel about people who still 
                                    do so today? 
                           
                               12. What is the Lebensborn that Hans Oderman describes (p. 400)? How 
                                    does this relate to the Final Solution? Does Oderman's personal and 
                                    academic interest in the Lebensborn remind you of another obsession 
                                    in this book? What do you think Gutfreund is trying to show by 
                                    suggesting this parallel?  
                           
                               13. Is Gutfreund a religious man? How does he account for his father's 
                                    survival, and for the survival of those members of his family and 
                                    community who share their stories? 
                           
                           
                                
                                
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                                                                                                                                                          3
                            www.makomisrael.org
                                                                                                                                                                            
                                
                                
                               REVIEW QUOTES: 
                                
                                
                                
                               Consider these quotes individually. What does each add to your 
                               understanding of Amir Gutfreund and his work? Do you agree with the claims 
                               they make?  
                                
                                
                                
                               "Amir Gutfreund wrote a wonderful book. He has a keen eye for observation, 
                               elegance of language and a captivating sense of humor. I can't wait for his 
                               next book!" --Meir Shalev  
                                
                               "A remarkable book, an impressive achievement as a literary creation and in 
                               its dealing with the subject matter without cliches or condescension, with 
                               psychological and social insights, black humor and a rare ability to tell a story. 
                               I read this book in one sitting."  
                               --Haaretz 
                                
                               "Gutfreund's writing is brilliant, his teasing narrative mesmerizing, and the 
                               thought behind it subtle and extraordinarily limber in its shadings of Jewish life 
                               under the Nazis. This is no beginner's effort, but a powerhouse 
                               accomplishment rivaling Gunter Grass' The Tin Drum or Gabriel Garcia 
                               Marquez's One Hundred Years of Solitude." 
                               --The Seattle Times 
                                 
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                               
                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                  www.makomisrael.org
                              
