                     PACKAGE LEAFLET: INFORMATION FOR THE USER 
                                         MEDICA THROAT SPRAY MENTHOL, 20 mg/10 ml; 5 mg/10 ml,  
                                                                            oromucosal spray 
                                                      Chlorhexidine gluconate - Lidocaine hydrochloride  
                                                                                          
                     Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
                     important information for you. 
                     Always use this medicine exactely as described in this leaflet or as your doctor or pharmacist has told 
                     you.  
                                               -    Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
                                               -    Ask your pharmacist if you need more information or advice. 
                                               -    If you get any side effects,  talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any 
                                                    possible side effects not listed in this leaflet.  
                                               -    You must talk to a doctor if you do not feel better or if you feel worse after 3 to 4 
                                                    days.  
                                              
                     What is in this leaflet: 
                     1. What Medica throat spray menthol is and what it is used for. 
                     2. What you need to know before you use Medica throat spray menthol. 
                     3. How to use Medica throat spray menthol. 
                     4. Possible side effects. 
                     5. How to store Medica throat spray menthol. 
                     6. Contents of the pack and other information. 
                      
                     1.       WHAT MEDICA THROAT SPRAY MENTHOL IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR. 
                              Medica throat spray menthol is a spray for local action in the mouth and the pharynx.  
                              It is an antiseptic and local pain-killer. 
                              Medica throat spray menthol is recommended for: 
                              -     The  treatment  of  the  symptoms  of  a  sore  throat,  red  throat,  disorders  of  the  pharynx 
                                    accompanied by irritation. 
                              -     In case of a bacterial infection accompanied by fever, an additional treatment is necessary. 
                              -     Medica throat spray menthol is sugar-free and is therefore also suited for diabetics. 
                                     
                     2.       WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW BEFORE YOU USE MEDICA THROAT SPRAY 
                              MENTHOL. 
                              Do not use Medica throat spray menthol 
                              -     If you are allergic to chlorhexidine gluconate or lidocaine hydrochloride or any of the other 
                                    ingredients of Medica throat spray menthol (listed in section 6). 
                              -     On children younger than 6 years old. 
