                    Department of Veterans Affairs                                                                         October 2013 
                    Invoice Review and Certification                                                      Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                     
                     
                    VA Financial Policies and Procedures 
                    Invoice Review and Certification 
                     
                    CHAPTER 1A 
                     
                    0101  OVERVIEW ...........................................................................................................2         
                    0102  POLICIES .............................................................................................................2       
                    0103  AUTHORITY AND REFERENCES .......................................................................9                         
                    0104  ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES ................................................................10.....   
                    0105  PROCEDURES ................................................................................................11  ... 
                    0106  DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................12 ...... 
                    0107  RESCISSIONS ................................................................................................15  .... 
                    0108  QUESTIONS ................................................................................................15.......         
                    0109  REVISIONS ................................................................................................15.........       
                    APPENDIX A:  RELEVANT FINANCIAL SYSTEMS....................................................17  
                    APPENDIX B:  ADDITIONAL VA GUIDANCE FOR PROMPT PAYMENT ACT ......... 19 
                    APPENDIX C:  REVIEW OF MEDICAL SERVICES INVOICES ...................................21  
                     
                                                                                 1 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                   October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                   Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
               0101  OVERVIEW 
                
               This chapter establishes the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) financial policies and 
               procedures regarding invoice review and certification and other controls for ensuring 
               that payments are proper and accurate.  VA processes several different types of 
               invoices, to include vendor, Veteran benefit, employee travel, salary payments, and 
               other miscellaneous payments.  This chapter focuses on the general processes used to 
               review and certify vendor invoices for payment and payment reviews including the roles 
               and responsibilities of a Certifying Officer and Certifying Official. 
                
               VA’s financial and other automated systems are designed to eliminate the majority of 
                                                                                           1
               the manual processes that historically were related to a voucher audit  prior to payment.  
               Appendix A, VA Financial Systems, lists the various systems used in the process of 
               reviewing and certifying invoices and in the payment reviews. 
               0102  POLICIES 
                
               010201  INVOICE REVIEW AND CERTIFICATION.  All invoices will be date stamped 
               upon receipt, stamped paid, either manually or electronically, and maintained for 
               purposes of audit requirements.   
                
               010201.01  Invoice Review. 
                
               A.  VA will follow the Prompt Payment Act (PPA) for accepting goods, establishing the 
               payment due date, and calculating any applicable discounts or interest required for 
               procurement contracts, vendor payments, and utility payments per 5 C.F.R. Part 1315 
               and other regulatory guidance.  Refer to Appendix B, Additional VA Guidance for 
               Prompt Payment Act, for VA-specific information.   
                
               B.  VA will conduct invoice reviews based upon manual and/or automated processes.  
               Invoice reviews provide assurances that invoices include necessary substantiation and 
               documentation for lawful and proper payment before payment certification.  The 
               principal objectives are to determine whether: 
                
               •   The goods have been received or the services have been performed and are in 
               accordance with the contract, purchase order, or agreement. 
                
               •   The prices, subtotals and totals are accurate. 
                
               •   The invoice includes the contract, purchase order, or agreement number and is in 
               accordance with the terms of the contract, purchase order, or agreement. 
                                                            
               1
                 Vouchers were forms required to be submitted by a vendor along with an invoice to request payment.  
               Two examples of vouchers required were the SF 1034, Public Voucher for Purchases and Services Other 
               than Personal, and the SF 1113, Public Voucher for Transportation Charges.  Both are still in use, but are 
               not required to be submitted with a vendor invoice. 
                                                               2 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
              
             •  The payee, vendor, and vendor code (as applicable) is correct.  A Tax Identification 
             Number or Payee Identification Number, is provided for each payee. 
              
             •  The invoice is not a duplicate or has not been paid previously. 
              
             •  All applicable deductions were made and credited to the proper account in the 
             correct amount. 
              
             •  The appropriation or fund from which the payment will be made is available for that 
             purpose. 
              
             Refer to Appendix C, Review of Medical Services Invoices, for additional information on 
             certain health care invoices. 
              
             C.  VA will annotate invoices and supporting documents so that they are processed for 
             payment only one time.  All invoices will be sent directly to the designated agency office 
             (e.g., the Financial Services Center (FSC), the VBA Regional Office, or other office per 
             the contract, purchase order, or agreement). 
              
             1.  It is the responsibility of the vendor to ensure invoices are sent to the proper office 
             identified in the terms of the contract, purchase order, or agreement. 
              
             2.  It is the responsibility of the designated agency office (when different from the 
             payment office) to ensure that the certified invoices are routed and submitted to the 
             designated payment office in accordance with the PPA to ensure timely payment.  They 
             will also handle vendor inquiries on payments made by their office, e.g., subsistence 
             payments and certified payments, and the contracting officer will handle discrepancies. 
              
             D.  When incorrect or improper invoices (not in accordance with the terms of the 
             contract, purchase order, or agreement) are received, they may be returned to the 
             vendor according to the following dates (or in accordance with the PPA) from invoice 
             receipt:  
              
             •  7 calendar days for general services or goods; 
              
             •  3 days for meat products or fish, or 
              
             •  5 days for perishable goods, perishable agricultural commodities, edible fats or oils, 
             and food products prepared from edible fats or oils. 
              
             010201.02  Invoice Certification.  Certifying Officials will review invoices to ensure that 
             the information on the invoice, as described in 010201A and 010201B above, agrees 
             with the contract, purchase order, or agreement and that the invoice is correct and 
             proper for payment.  Refer to Volume VIII Chapter 1, Administrative Fiscal Policies and 
             Procedures for additional information on Certifying Officials. 
                                                      3 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
              
             A.  Certifying Officials are responsible for the verification and accuracy of facts stated on 
             an invoice, payments, and in supporting documents and records.  An FMS Form 210 
             designation is not required.     
              
             B.  Certifying Officials will respond in a timely manner to any reviewing official’s 
             questionable-payment inquiry.  
              
             C.  To promote professionalism and strengthen internal controls, a Certifying Official will 
             generally have knowledge of the subject matter, knowledge of appropriations and other 
             funds and accounting classifications, and knowledge of the payment process 
             (e.g., availability of funds and location of designated paying and accounting offices). 
              
             D.  By manually, electronically, or digitally signing an invoice, a Certifying Official 
             certifies to a Disbursing Officer that the items listed are correct and proper for payment 
             from the appropriation(s) or other funds designated thereon or on supporting invoices, 
             and that the proposed payment is legal, proper, and correct.  Manual certifications on 
             invoices, when appropriate, will include the Certifying Official’s signature, typed or 
             printed name, the title “Authorized Certifying Official,” date signed, date of acceptance, 
             and dollar amount. 
              
             E.  Occasionally, there may be more than one Certifying Official involved with a given 
             payment; this is known as “successive certification.”  In this circumstance, the 
             successive Certifying Official actions do not diminish the responsibility of the official who 
             certified the original invoice.  If the official who certifies an additional related invoice is 
             different than the one who certified the original, the initial Certifying Official is 
             responsible for the correctness of the original invoice, and the successive Certifying 
             Official is responsible only for the additional related invoice.  If an invoice is certified and 
             subsequently changed (e.g., to take a discount, add interest penalties), the Certifying 
             Official certifying the legality, propriety, and correctness of the changes is monetarily 
             liable for only the payments based on those changes; that is, successive Certifying 
             Officials are monetarily liable for only the changes they certify. 
              
             010202  DOCUMENTATION.  All invoices certified, whether in hard copy or by 
             electronic means, will be supported with sufficient documentation to enable the audit of 
             the transactions as required by law. 
              
             A.  For individual claims, the audit requirement may include, but is not limited to, the 
             requisition of goods, request for proposals or solicitations, issuance of purchase order 
             or contract, or preparation of a receiving report or other evidence of performance or 
             receipt. 
              
             B.  Audit requirements for the entire process may include, but are not limited to, 
             identification of accounting classification codes, maintenance of relevant dates, such as 
             preparation date, receipt date, and accounting date, maintenance of records 
             (e.g., authorization of individuals to perform specific functions, signature cards, letter of 
                                                      4 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                   October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                   Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
               authorization) or maintenance, in an automated environment, of batch control logs, 
               header and trailer records, error listings, suspense and exception reports, etc. 
                
               C.  Certified invoices and associated papers, information, data, or services used to 
               support them will be kept for 6 years and 3 months or in accordance with the National 
               Archives and Records Administration (NARA) guidance. 
                
               010203  INTERNAL CONTROLS. 
                
               A.  General Accounting Segregation of Duties.  VA facilities, stations, and finance 
               activities will ensure that Certifying Officers and Certifying Officials are not responsible 
               for other financial and accounting functions that are in conflict with their duties.  As 
                                                 2
               identified by auditing standards , individuals will not have authority for more than one 
               function: 
                
               •   Authorizing or approving the request for the obligation or related transaction; 
               •   Recording the obligation or related transactions; and 
               •   Certifying the receipt of the goods or services and processing the payment. 
               Key duties and responsibilities will be divided or segregated among different individuals 
               to reduce the risk of error or fraud.  This includes separating the responsibilities for 
               authorizing transactions, processing and recording them, reviewing the transactions, 
               and handling any related assets.  No one individual will control all key aspects of a 
               transaction or event.  For example, a manager authorizing obligations would not be 
               responsible for entering obligations into financial management systems or handling the 
               payment of invoices. 
                
               B.  1358 Obligations (VA Form 1358) Segregation of Duties. In accordance with the 
               Office of Financial Policy (OFP) Volume II, Chapter 6, 1358 Obligations, segregation of 
               duties has been further defined to prohibit any one official from performing more than 
               one of the following: 
                
                                                     3
               •   Requesting the 1358 obligation ; 
               •   Approving the 1358 obligation; 
               •   Recording the obligation of funds; or 
                                                            
               2
                 Derived from Government Accountability Office (GAO), Standards for Internal Control in the Federal 
               Government, http://www.gao.gov/special.pubs/ai2131.pdf.  
               3
                 For 2237’s, the requestor of the purchase order is also a separate individual with similar functions as 
               requesting the 1358 obligation. 
                
                                                               5 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
             •  Certifying delivery of receipt of goods or services and approving payment. 
             C.  Management Controls.  VA management control objectives are achieved by 
             instituting a system of supervision to ensure policy and procedures are being followed.  
             Supervision of invoice review and certification includes assigning responsibilities and 
             duties to appropriate personnel and reviewing the work periodically. 
              
             010204  INVOICE QUALITY ASSURANCE REVIEWS. 
              
             VA will conduct periodic invoice quality assurance reviews as determined appropriate 
             based on the procedure or system used for review and subsequent payment.  Various 
             publications provide guidance on sampling methods for invoice and payment quality 
             assurance reviews (e.g., the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-123, 
             “Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control,” Appendix C, Requirements for 
             Effective Measurement and Remediation of Improper Payments); however, there is no 
             one universal procedure appropriate for every type of disbursing system.   
              
             The appropriateness of these reviews conducted by VA personnel who are performing 
             their quality assurance duties or the VA Inspector General depends largely on the 
             extent of automation of the system that computes and processes payments.  Fully 
             automated financial systems that perform reviews of all records through extensive edit 
             checks and balances before payment essentially replace manual invoice reviews.  They 
             may also negate the need to perform pre-payment statistical random reviews for 
             population-trend identification.  In such cases, post-payment statistical sampling of 
             invoice payments replaces the pre-payment reviews as a means to validate the 
             accuracy of the automated system calculations and ensure that edit checks and 
             balances are operating properly.  
              
             010205  ADMINISTRATIONS AND STAFF OFFICES.  Administrations and staff offices 
             may have specific policies and procedures for invoice reviews (e.g., invoice certifying 
             official/VBA administrative certifying officer).  The invoice certification process may be 
             different between the Administrations or staff offices depending on the system being 
             used to process the payment (e.g., Centralized Administrative Accounting Transaction 
             System (CAATS), Invoice Payment Processing System (IPPS), or manual processes, 
             as applicable).  Refer to Appendix C, Review of Medical Services Invoices, for 
             additional information on certain health care invoices. 
              
             010206  PAYMENT CERTIFICATION. 
              
             A.  VA will certify payments made from appropriated funds to individuals and 
             commercial activities. 
              
             B.  Construction Payments.  The Prompt Pay Act, Title 31 U.S.C. 3901-3907, and  
             5 C.F.R. Part 1315 require that construction contract progress payments be paid within 
             14 days after VA first receives a payment request from the contractor, unless a longer 
             payment period is called for in the contract.  VA Office of Construction and Facilities 
                                                      6 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
             Management (CFM) contracting officers are required to determine the adequacy of 
             payment requests during that time period.   
              
             1.  Payment requests which are determined to be deficient will be returned to the 
             contractor within 7 days after receipt, accompanied by a statement identifying the 
             deficiency.  
              
             2.  Interest payments are due if progress payments, approved as payable, remain 
             unpaid for a period of more than 14 days after receipt of the payment request, unless a 
             longer period of time is called for in the contract.   
              
             3.  Contract payments will be made as close as possible to, but not later than, the 30th 
             day following final acceptance. 
              
             010207  PAYMENT REVIEW.  VA will perform payment reviews on selected payments. 
             VA will use sampling procedures for both prior and post-payment certification.  VA relies 
             upon a system of automated and manual controls to ensure that payments are proper 
             before disbursement.  A key control is the review and approval of all payments by 
             approving officials prior to certification.  Certifying Officers and Certifying Officials rely 
             upon reviews by approving officials and the preparation of appropriate documentation 
             by contracting officers and approving officials.  In the case of invoices that are post-
             certified based on dollar criteria, the approving official also serves de facto as the 
             Certifying Official when the uncertified invoice is paid.  Failure to appropriately 
             discharge the duties of an approving official may result in disciplinary action through 
             VA’s personnel system. 
              
             A.  Accelerated Payment Methods.  VA may use accelerated payment methods when 
             processing invoices.  Refer to 5 C.F.R. 1315.5 for the types of payments meeting the 
             requirements for accelerated payment. 
              
             B.  Fast Pay/Statistical Sampling Method.  Both 5 CFR Subpart 1315.6 and 48 CFR 
             Subpart 13.3, permit the use of “fast pay” procedures to pay vendor invoices before 
             supplies have been received.  The Government Accountability Office (GAO) Policy and 
             Procedures Manual for Guidance of Federal Agencies: Title 7 - Fiscal Guidance, 
             Chapter 7, Section 7.4F, authorizes the use of the Fast Pay/Statistical Sampling 
             method.  When employing the Fast Pay/Statistical Sampling method, payments will be 
             made prior to obtaining administrative certifications. 
              
             1.  The use of statistical sampling for post-payment review in conjunction with "fast pay" 
             procedures is allowable, subject to several conditions: 
              
             •  The economic benefit to the Government must exceed the risk of loss, 
              
             •  The plan will provide for a meaningful sampling of all invoices not subject to a 100 
             percent audit, and 
              
                                                      7 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                 October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                  Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
               •   The plan will provide a reliable and defensible basis for the certification of payments. 
                
               2.  Invoices are subject to the same internal controls and reconciliation procedures as 
               other payments.  Invoices for payment will meet the following criteria: 
                
               •   Payment of invoices utilizing the Fast Pay/Statistical Sampling method will be 
               properly identified in the automated accounting system for a subsequent statistical 
               sample. 
                
               •   All invoices will be date stamped upon receipt, stamped paid, either manually or 
               electronically, and maintained for audit and audit requirement purposes. 
                
               •   All invoices will be properly matched with obligations prior to payment authorization. 
                
               •   Program offices will notify the finance activity if items are not received in a timely 
               manner or there is some other receiving problem. 
                
               •   The finance activity must have the ability to withhold fast pay payments to certain 
               vendors until approval and authorization of the invoice is received. 
                
               •   Payments made prior to verification that goods or services have been received will 
               be reviewed at least quarterly by a valid statistical sample, and verification of receipt for 
               goods or services will be obtained. 
                
               •   Detailed accounting reports showing payments made at the obligation document 
               level will be regularly provided to both the fiscal/finance office and program office. 
                
                                  4
               010208  CLAIMS.   VA will review claims made by vendors for non-receipt of payment 
               and will examine the accounting records to see whether an earlier claim or cancellation 
               has been processed.  VA will determine if the vendor is entitled and identify the source 
               from which the funds were originally paid.  VA may re-certify a payment from the 
               appropriation or fund from which the original payment was made (or its successor 
               account). 
                
               010209  MONETARY LIABILITY. 
                
               A.  VA is responsible for assessing the personal liability and obligations of its Certifying 
                                                 5
               Officers and Certifying Officials .  VA’s Certifying Officers and Certifying Officials may 
                                                            
               4
                 Prior to Public Law 104-53, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) had responsibility for 
               settlement claims.  Public Law 104-53 granted this authority to OMB.  In two OMB memorandums titled 
               Determination with Respect to Transfer of Functions Pursuant to Public law 104-53, dated June 18, 1996, 
               and December 17, 1996, the OMB Director subsequently delegated the authority to the executive branch 
               agency out of whose activity the claims arose. 
               5
                 Refer to Volume VIII Ch 1, Administrative Fiscal Policies and Procedures for additional information on 
               designating certifiers and the roles of a Certifying Officer and Certifying Official. 
                                                              8 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                  October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                   Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
               be monetarily liable for any payments resulting from illegal, improper or incorrect 
               certifications in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3528 and other applicable laws. 
                
               B.  Certifying Officers, Certifying Officials and Disbursing Officers are responsible for 
               proving, in the relief of liability process, that it is more likely than not that they either 
               were not negligent or were not the proximate cause of the fiscal irregularity.  When an 
               improper or incorrect payment is certified by a Certifying Officer or Certifying Official, 
                                                                                           6
               relief may be granted by the Comptroller General of the United States.   The 
               Comptroller General may relieve a Certifying Officer or Certifying Official of 
               responsibility for the physical loss or deficiency of public money, checks, securities, or 
               records or authorize reimbursement from an appropriation or fund available for the 
               activity in which the loss or deficiency occurred.  Refer to Volume VIII, Chapter 3, Agent 
               Cashier Accountability Policy, Appendix M:  Losses and Overages for additional 
               information. 
                
               C.  Certifying Officers and Certifying Officials acting in good faith and in conformity with 
               an authorized control system and/or statistical sampling procedure will not be held liable 
               for any certification or payment that was not subject to specific examination because of 
               the procedure. 
                
               D.  Factors considered by the Comptroller General in relieving liability are, whether the 
               obligation was incurred in good faith, that no law specifically prohibited the payment, the 
               U. S. Government received value for the payment, and evidence that the payments 
               were accurate and legal relating to the automated system rather than the individual 
               transactions.  Information showing that the system on which Certifying Officers or 
               Certifying Officials rely is functioning properly and evidence that reviews are made 
               periodically to determine that the automated systems are operating effectively, and can 
               be relied on to produce payments that are accurate and legal, may be used by the 
               Comptroller General to relieve liability. 
               0103  AUTHORITY AND REFERENCES 
                
               010301  31 U.S.C. 3321, Disbursing Authority in the Executive Branch 
                
               010302  31 U.S.C. 3325, Vouchers 
                
               010303  31 U.S.C. 3521, Audits by agencies 
                
               010304  31 U.S.C. 3528, Auditing and Settling Accounts 
                
               010305  31 U.S.C. 3702, Authority to Settle Claims 
                
               010306  31 U.S.C. 3901–3907, Prompt Payment 
                                                            
               6
                 The Comptroller General of the United States is the head of the GAO, a legislative branch agency 
               established by Congress in 1921 to ensure the fiscal and managerial accountability of the Federal 
               Government. 
                                                              9 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
              
             010307  5 C.F.R. Part 1315, Prompt Payment Act 
              
             010308  48 C.F.R.  Subpart 13.3, Simplified Acquisition Methods 
              
             010309  48 C.F.R. Part 32.9, Prompt Payment  
              
             010310  OMB Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control  
              
             010311  OMB Circular A-127, Financial Management Systems  
              
             010312  GAO, Policy and Procedures Manual for Guidance of Federal Agencies: Title 7 
             - Fiscal Guidance 
              
             010313  GAO, Streamlining the Payment Process While Maintaining Effective Internal 
             Control 
              
             010314  GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government 
              
             010315  Office of Financial Policy Publications Library 
             0104  ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
              
             010401  The Assistant Secretary for Management/Chief Financial Officer (CFO) 
             oversees all financial management activities relating to the Department’s programs and 
             operations, as required by the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and 38 U.S.C. 309.  
             Specific responsibilities include the direction, management and provision of policy 
             guidance and oversight of VA’s financial management personnel, activities and 
             operations.  The CFO establishes financial policy, systems and operating procedures 
             for all VA financial entities and provides guidance on all aspects of financial 
             management. 
              
             010402  Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Chief Financial Officers 
             (Administrations’ CFOs, other office CFOs), Fiscal Officers, Chiefs of Finance Activities, 
             Chief Accountants and other key officials are responsible for ensuring compliance with 
             the policies and procedures set forth in this chapter. 
              
             010403  Certifying Officer.  VA will appoint Certifying Officers through delegation of 
             authority from the Secretary of VA in the form of written authorization (i.e., FMS Form 
             210 filed with the Department of the Treasury (Treasury).  Only Certifying Officers (i.e., 
             authorized individuals as defined within VA or VBA) shall perform the certification of 
             payments (e.g., batch payments) to Treasury.  Certifying Officers will be Federal 
             government employees and U.S. citizens.  Certifying Officers may not serve as both the 
             Authorizing (Approving) Official and the Disbursing Officer.  Refer to Section 010203, for 
             additional information on prohibiting dual functions.   
              
                                                     10 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                  October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                   Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
                                         7
               FSC’s Certifying Officer  approves schedules of payments transmitted to Treasury for 
               disbursements and is responsible only for errors made in the processing of the voucher 
               schedule, such as the number of individual vouchers and total dollar amount of 
               vouchers submitted to Treasury for payment, not the individual vouchers (see 
               Comptroller General B-302789).  Accordingly, the role performed by the Financial 
               Services Center (FSC) is not the same as the role of “approving payment” as identified 
               below. 
                
               This role of “approving payments” for individual invoices, as accomplished in the 
               Veterans Health Information System and Technology Architecture (VISTA) Fee system, 
               CAATS (VBA only), or IPPS is not to be confused with the role of a Certifying Officer at 
               the FSC in Austin, TX, who approves a schedule of payments transmitted to Treasury.  
               The “approving payment” role noted in this policy is the official (including administration 
               and staff offices) who approves payment in the VISTA Fee system, CAATS, IPPS, or 
               other subsidiary payment systems used by VA. 
                
               010404  Certifying Official.  The Certifying Official is responsible for certifying invoices 
               for payments and ensuring these payments are proper and accurate.  The Certifying 
               Official does not require a filing of FMS Form 210.  Under 31 U.S.C. 3528, Certifying 
               Officials are responsible for information stated in the invoice, supporting records, the 
               computation of a certified invoice, and the legality of a proposed payment under the 
               appropriation or fund involved.  In addition, they may be responsible for reimbursing the 
               Federal government for any payment determined to be illegal, improper, or incorrect 
               because a certification was determined to be prohibited by law, or does not represent a 
               legal obligation under the fund or appropriation involved.   
                
               010405  Disbursing Officers.  Treasury Disbursing Officers (FMS Form 210 designation 
               on file) and VA Agent Cashiers (for further information, see Volume VIII, Chapter 3, 
               Agent Cashier Accountability Policy) who have been granted disbursing authority by the 
               Chief Disbursing Officer, whose principal functions consist of the disbursement, 
               collection and reporting of public funds.  VA will designate certain employees to become 
               disbursing officials, as authorized in 31 U.S.C. 3321 and 3325, to expend public money. 
               0105  PROCEDURES 
                
               010501  General procedural and other guidance for the following topics is in Section 
               0102, Policies: 
                
               •   010201  Invoice Review and Certification 
               •   010202  Documentation 
               •   010203  Internal Controls 
                                                            
               7
                 VBA has Certifying Officers who submit schedules to Treasury for benefit payments. 
                                                              11 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
             •  010204  Invoice Quality Assurance Reviews 
             •  010205  Administrations and Staff Offices 
             •  010206  Payment Certification 
             •  010207  Payment Review 
             •  010208  Claims 
             •  010209  Monetary Liability 
             010502  Other guidance and information is in the appendices, as indicated below: 
              
             •  Appendix A:  Relevant Financial Systems 
             •  Appendix B:  Additional VA Guidance For Prompt Payment Act 
             •  Appendix C:  Review of Medical Services Invoices 
             0106  DEFINITIONS 
              
             010601  Approval.  The attestation by an authorized individual that the provider of 
             goods or services for which the payment is being prepared is entitled to that payment, 
             subject to the goods being received or services performed being accepted as 
             satisfactory.  Receipt and payment approval may be reflected in a combined attestation. 
              
             010602  Audit Requirements.  The evidence in place (as a hard copy or in an authorized 
             electronic system) that allows for the retracing of a transaction to its source. 
              
             010603  Approving (Authorizing) Official.  An approving (authorizing) official is an 
             agency head or designee who manages the Certifying Officers.  All agency heads or 
             designees have the authority to delegate the Certifying Officer appointments and 
             revocation responsibility within the agency.   
              
             010604  Certification.  The act of verifying the legality of the obligation to be paid under 
             the particular appropriation, the correctness of the information contained in the invoice 
             and supporting records, and the accuracy of any computations. 
              
             010605  Certifying Officer.  An individual who is personally accountable and individually 
             responsible for verifying that the Federal government payments under his/her 
             jurisdiction are legal, proper, and correct.  If any payment, that is certified by the 
             Certifying Officer is found to be illegal, improper, or incorrect, that individual may be 
             held individually responsible for reimbursing the Federal government for the amount of 
             that payment.  
                                                     12 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                   October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                   Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
                
               010606 Certifying Official.  An individual who has been charged with the “approving 
               payment” responsibility for certifying invoices for payments and ensuring these 
               payments are proper and accurate.  If any payment certified by the Certifying Official is 
               found to be illegal, improper, or incorrect, that individual may be held individually 
               responsible for reimbursing the Federal government for the amount of that payment.  
               The Certifying Official does not require a filing of FMS Form 210.  The Certifying Official 
               shall be appointed in writing (e.g., job description, email, memo, etc.) by whomever has 
               the authority to do so. 
                
               010607  Disbursing Officers.  Treasury Disbursing Officers (FMS Form 210 designation 
               on file) and VA Agent Cashiers (for further information, see Volume VIII, Chapter 3, 
               Agent Cashier Accountability Policy) who have been designated disbursing authority by 
               the Chief Disbursing Officer, whose principal functions consist of the disbursement, 
               collection and reporting of public funds.  VA will designate certain employees to become 
               disbursing officials, as authorized in 31 U.S.C. 3321 and 3325, to expend public money.  
                
               010608  Fast Pay.  A payment procedure under the Federal Acquisition Regulation at 
               Part 13.4 which allows payment under limited conditions to a vendor prior to the 
               Government’s verification that supplies have been received and accepted. 
                
               010609  Improper Payment.  Any payment that should not have been made or that was 
               made in an incorrect amount (including overpayments and underpayments) under 
               statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements, and 
               includes any payment to an ineligible recipient, any payment for an ineligible good or 
               service, any duplicate payment, any payment for a good or service not received (except 
               for such payments where authorized by law), and any payment that does not account 
                                                    8
               for credit for applicable discounts.   
                
               010610  Internal Controls.  The organizational policies and procedures used to 
               reasonably ensure: 
                
               •   Programs achieved their intended results; 
                
               •   Resources are used consistent with the organization/Department mission; 
                
               •   Programs and resources are protected from waste, fraud, and mismanagement; 
                
               •   Laws and regulations are followed; and 
                
               •   Reliable and timely information is obtained, maintained, reported and used for 
               decision making. 
                
                                                            
               8
                 As defined in Public Law 111-204, Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010, July 22, 
               2010. 
                                                              13 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
              
             010611  Invoice.  A bill, written document, or electronically transmitted document 
             provided by a vendor requesting payment for goods received or services rendered.  A 
             proper invoice or an electronically transmitted document meets the requirements of the 
             Prompt Payment Act under 5 C.F.R. 1315.  The term “invoice” also includes a receiving 
             report and delivery tickets when contractually designated as invoices. 
              
             010612  Invoice Review.  An examination of documentation prior to payment of an item, 
             such as an invoice or other payment request. 
              
             010613  Legal Payment.  Legal means the payment is permitted by law and is 
             consistent with the purpose of the funding appropriation.  Proper means that funds are 
             available, the transaction or contract is properly documented, goods are received and 
             accepted and the invoice has been reviewed.  Correct means the payee, address and 
             amount are correct, and the payment is not a duplicate. 
              
             010614  Payment Review.  Examination of a transaction after its occurrence.  A post-
             payment review determines if VA’s policies and procedures have been properly 
             followed.  The test may be to verify if paid invoices have necessary documentation and 
             approvals.  This test verifies internal control procedures and work performed by financial 
             staff. 
               
             010615  Monetary Liability.  Personal financial liability for fiscal irregularities of 
             Disbursing ,Certifying Officers and Certifying Officials as an incentive to guard against 
             errors and theft by others, and also to protect the government against errors and 
             dishonesty by the officers themselves. 
              
             010616  Receipt of Goods or Services.  The acknowledgment (usually identified with a 
             signature) that goods ordered have been received or that services have been 
             performed.  This acknowledgment is the basis for approval of an invoice. 
              
             010617  Segregation of Duties.  The assigning to different individuals, the 
             responsibilities for authorizing transactions, recording transactions and maintaining 
             custody of assets.  Segregation of duties reduces the opportunities for one person to 
             both perpetrate and conceal errors of fraud and reduces the risk of error, waste, and 
             wrongful acts. 
              
             010618  Statistical Sampling.  Statistical sampling allows conclusions to be made about 
             (1) the universe of invoices from which the sample was selected, and (2) the procedures 
             in effect used to process all invoices in the universe.  Examination of the sample and 
             evaluation of the results permit correction of errors and other deficiencies found in the 
             items sampled and the procedures and controls directly related to the items.  Statistical 
             sampling also permits projections as to the quality of all invoices in the universe. 
              
             010619  Successive Certification.  More than one Certifying Official authorizes an 
             invoice for payment. 
                                                     14 
                Department of Veterans Affairs                                                       October 2013 
                Invoice Review and Certification                                       Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                 
                0107  RESCISSIONS 
                 
                010701  MP-4, Part 3, VA Controller Policy Voucher Auditing - Foreword  
                 
                010702  MP-4, Part 3, Chapter 1, General  
                 
                010703  MP-4, Part 3, Chapter 2, Examination of Vouchers and Contracts  
                 
                010704  MP-4, Part 3, Chapter 3, Various Vouchers and Special Requirements  
                 
                010705  MP-4, Part 3, Chapter 4, Related Procedures  
                 
                010706  MP-4, Part 3, Chapter 5, Insurance Voucher Auditing  
                 
                010707  MP-4, Part 3, Chapter 6, Statistical Sampling Procedures for Insurance 
                Refunds  
                 
                010708  OF Bulletin 03GC1.05, Prompt Payment Policy Supplement 
                 
                010709  OF Bulletin 01GC1.02, Prompt Payment Policy Update 
                 
                010710  Volume VIII, Ch 1A Invoice Review and Certification, dated November 2011 
                0108  QUESTIONS 
                 
                Questions concerning these financial policies and procedures should be directed as 
                follows: 
                 
                VHA                                    VHA CFO Accounting Policy (10A3A) (Outlook) 
                VBA                                    VAVBAWAS/CO/FINREP (Outlook) 
                All Others                             OFP Accounting Policy (Outlook) 
                0109  REVISIONS 
                 
                       Section                              Revision                         Office         Date 
                                         Updated the terms and usages of Certifying                       October 
                        Overall          Officer and Certifying Official throughout          APPS           2013 
                                         policy for consistency purposes 
                                         Updated first paragraph “including the roles                     October 
                   0101 Overview         and responsibilities of a Certifying Officer        APPS           2013 
                                         and Certifying Official” 
                  010201.02 Invoice      Referred to Certifying Official instead of          APPS         October 
                     Certification       Certifying Officer throughout section                              2013 
                                                                  15 
               Department of Veterans Affairs                                                 October 2013 
               Invoice Review and Certification                                 Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                
                     Section                           Revision                       Office        Date 
                                      Added examples for the types of individuals 
                      010205          that perform reviews for Administrations and                October 
                Administrations and   staff offices; changed reference throughout     APPS          2013 
                   Staff Offices      policy from OLCS to Invoice Payment 
                                      Processing System (IPPS) 
                 010206 Payment       Moved (B) & (C) to Vol VIII Ch 1; Deleted       APPS        October 
                   Certification      (D); moved construction payments to (B)                       2013 
                 010209 Monetary      Added a new sentence in (A); added                          October 
                      Liability       reference to “Certifying Officials” throughout  APPS          2013 
                                      section 
                0103 Authority and    Added reference and link for 010301 31                      October 
                    References        U.S.C. 3321, Disbursing Authority in the        APPS          2013 
                                      Executive Branch; re-checked links  
                  0104 Roles and      Revised 010402 to include reference to                      October 
                  Responsibilities    “Administration CFO, other office CFO;”         APPS          2013 
                                      revised 010403 “Certifying Officer” role 
                                      010605 revised definition for “Certifying                   October 
                 0106 Definitions     Officer;” added definition for “Certifying      APPS          2013 
                                      Officer and Disbursing Officer” 
                 0107 Rescissions     Added Rescission for current policy Vol VIII    APPS        October 
                                      Ch 1A                                                         2013 
                  0109 Revisions      Added Revisions Table                           APPS        October 
                       Table                                                                        2013 
                                      Updated the name of system: Fee Basis 
                                      Claims System (FBCS); spelled out GUI –                     October 
                    Appendix A        Graphical User Interface; added NFC             APPS          2013 
                                      system that makes employee salary and 
                                      benefit payments for OIG  
                                      Deleted reference to “who uses the Govt 
                Appendix B (A) (1)    travel charge card” – the Prompt Payment        APPS        October 
                                      Act applies to travel reimbursements,                         2013 
                                      whether or not they use a travel card or not  
                                      Updated VHA placeholder– VHA will update 
                    Appendix C        appendix subsequent to standardizing its        APPS        October 
                                      procedures for the material on invoice                        2013 
                                      review of medical services 
                                                             16 
              Department of Veterans Affairs                                            October 2013 
              Invoice Review and Certification                              Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                                                                                                                                     A  ppendix A 
              APPENDIX A:  RELEVANT FINANCIAL SYSTEMS 
               
              A.  The following table outlines VA financial systems used in invoice review, invoice 
              certification and/or issuing payment. 
               
                     System                Administration or                   Description 
                                              Staff Office 
           Benefits Delivery Network     VBA                      Used for accounting and payment of 
           (BDN)                                                  certain educational, compensation, and 
                                                                  pension benefits.  
           Centralized Administrative    VBA and NCA              Used by VBA for invoicing, accounting 
           Accounting Transaction                                 and issuing payment.  Used by NCA 
           System (CAATS)                                         for administrative accounting functions. 
           “Corporate” and the five      VBA (Vocational          An automated case management 
           BETA test stations: Waco,     Rehabilitation and       system used to track and manage 
           Indianapolis, Newark,         Employment Division)     caseloads and program costs. 
           Roanoke and Seattle) 
           CWINRS 
           e-Gov Travel System           All                      Used for travel authorizations and 
                                                                  expense reports (payments). 
           Financial Management          All                      Used for goods and services and some 
           System (FMS)                                           benefit payments. 
           Insurance General Ledger      VBA                      Used by VBA for accounting and 
           System (IGLS)                                          payment of insurance claims. 
           Integrated Funds              VACO, VHA and other  Part of the Veterans Health Information 
           Distribution, Control Point   select offices           Systems and Technology Architecture 
           Activity, Accounting, and                              (VISTA) system used for accounting, 
           Procurement (IFCAP)                                    budget, purchase card, or 
                                                                  procurement. 
                                         VBA                       
           Loan Guarantee Programs:                               Used to monitor servicing loans, 
                                                                  generate loss mitigation 
           VA Loan Electronic                                     recommendations, review adequacy of 
           Reporting Interface                                    services, review non-routine claims 
           (VALERI)                                               and incentives, and conduct post 
                                                                  audits.  VALERI and FMS interface to 
                                                                  upload payment certification and bill of 
                                                                  collection certification data to FMS and 
                                                                  download vendor file updates, payment 
                                                                  status details and cash receipts to 
                                                                  VALERI.   
                                                                   
                                                         17 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                                                                                                                                    A  ppendix A 
                    System              Administration or                 Description 
                                           Staff Office 
           Centralized Property       All Staff Offices and  A web based property tracking and 
           Tracking System (CPTS)     Administrations,       oversight system.  CPTS provides 
                                      except VBA field       support for property contract or 
                                      offices                oversight activities and is used to 
                                                             review and process property contractor 
                                                             invoices for payment. 
           Invoice Payment            FSC (online            Used for invoice certification.   
           Processing System (IPPS)  certification system) 
           Station Inquiry System     VBA                    Used to search for vendor information, 
           (SIS)                                             payment history, etc. 
           VETSNET                    VHA                    Used for accounting and payment of 
                                                             compensation, pension, and education 
                                                             claims and recurring payments. 
           VISTA Fee Application      VHA                    Used for authorization and payment of 
           Software                                          non-VA medical care claims. 
           Fee Basis Claims System                           Used for graphical user interface (GUI) 
           (FBCS)                                            interface to Vista Fee Application 
                                                             Software. 
              
             B.  The following systems are operated by other agencies but used by VA to review, 
             certify, and/or issue a payment. 
              
                    System              Administration or                 Description 
                                           Staff Office 
           Department of Defense,     Defense Civilian Pay   Used in conjunction with VA HR and 
           Defense Finance and        System (DCPS)          Payroll systems for employee salary 
           Accounting Service                                and benefit payments. 
           (DFAS) 
           Department of State (DOS)  DOS Financial          Used by Manila for foreign payments.  
                                      System                 The VA Manila Office posts payments 
                                                             manually into VA’s FMS to record 
                                                             transactions. 
           Department of Health and   Health and Human       Used for approval and issuance of 
           Human Services             Services, Payment      grant payments. 
                                      Management System 
                                      (HHS/PMS) 
           U.S. Department of         USDA Payroll and       Used in conjunction with VA HR and 
           Agriculture (USDA)         Processing System      Payroll systems for employee salary 
           National Finance Center                           and benefit payments. 
              
                                                     18 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                                                                                                                                    A  ppendix B 
             APPENDIX B:  ADDITIONAL VA GUIDANCE FOR PROMPT PAYMENT ACT 
              
             A.  TYPES OF PAYMENTS.  The Prompt Payment Act applies to payments incurred as 
             the result of a procurement contract.  A procurement contract means any enforceable 
             agreement, rental and lease agreement, purchase order, delivery order, requirements-
             type (open-ended) service contract, or blanket purchase agreement between VA and a 
             vendor.  A vendor means any person, organization, or business concern engaged in a 
             profession, trade, or business and any not-for-profit entity operating as a vendor, 
             including State and local governments and foreign entities, but excluding Federal 
             entities.   
              
             The Act does not apply to contract financing payments, payments related to 
             emergencies and Commodity Credit Corporation payments.  A contract financing 
             payment means an authorized disbursement of monies prior to acceptance of goods or 
             services including advance payments, progress payments based on cost, progress 
             payments (other than under construction contracts) based on a percentage or stage of 
             completion, payments on performance-based contracts and interim payments on cost-
             type contracts.  Contract financing payments do not include invoice payments, 
             payments for partial deliveries, or lease and rental payments. 
              
             1.  VA payments subject to Prompt Payment Act.  Examples include: 
              
             •  Payments to State, local governments and vendors for goods and services 
             authorized by a contract; 
              
             •  Loan guaranty invoices for expenses associated with foreclosure, management, 
             repair, sale of the acquired properties and certain expenses associated with specially 
             adapted housing grants; 
              
             •  Travel reimbursement to VA employees for official Government travel; 
              
             •  Payments to community nursing homes and contract hospitalization; 
              
             •  Progress payments on construction and architectural contracts; 
              
             •  Utility payments for which State, local or foreign authorities do not impose late 
             payment fees; and 
              
             •  Payments for meat, meat food products, fish, fresh eggs, dairy products and other 
             perishable agricultural commodities. 
              
             2.  VA payments exempt from Prompt Payment Act.  Examples include: 
              
             •  Payments to other Federal entities; 
              
                                                     19 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                                                                                                                                    A  ppendix B 
             •  Payments to beneficiaries, survivors, including travel reimbursements; 
              
             •  Payments to individuals for personal services not covered by a contract; 
              
             •  Advance payments, contract financing, progress payments (other than construction 
             and architectural contracts); 
              
             •  Utility payments for which State, local or foreign authorities impose late payment 
             fees; 
              
             •  Claims for payments of Civilian Health and Medical Program administered by VA 
             (CHAMPVA);  
              
             •  Payments for medical and dental services which fall under non-VA care and are not 
             covered in a contract or sharing agreement; 
              
             •  Payments for non-VA care pharmacy; and 
              
             •  Payments of loan guaranty claims and property acquisitions.
                                                     20 
             Department of Veterans Affairs                                       October 2013 
             Invoice Review and Certification                          Volume VIII – Chapter 1A 
                                                                                                                                    A  ppendix C 
             APPENDIX C:  REVIEW OF MEDICAL SERVICES INVOICES 
              
             NOTE:  This Appendix will be a placeholder until such time as VHA standardizes its 
             procedures for the material on invoice reviews of medical services.  For additional 
             information, forward medical services inquiries to the VHA Policy shared inbox at VHA 
             CFO Accounting Policy (10A3A). 
              
                                                     21 
       
       
                         22 
