                                                         
                               SCHOOL CODES OF PRACTICE AND POLICES 
                                                         
                                                         
            Working in University buildings outside normal working hours 
             
            Normal working hours are currently defined as 0800-1800 hrs, Monday to Friday.  'Out of Hours' 
            refers to any time outside these normal working hours.   
             
            Legislation does not permit persons to work alone for certain activities, e.g. entering confined 
            spaces, working with unsecured ladders, erecting scaffolding, heavy lifting operations; and there 
            are many other work activities where consideration of potential risks to lone workers is vital, 
            particularly those involving the handling of hazardous chemicals and the use of certain 
            electrically powered tools and equipment. 
            As a general rule supervisors must ensure that any operation carrying a medium or high risk of 
            injury, is not undertaken by someone who does not have a colleague available to give 
            appropriate assistance. 
            A risk assessment must be carried out before any work is undertaken.  The process of risk 
            categorisation into low, medium or high is fundamental to safe working out-of-hours. 
            Low Risk Work      This work may be undertaken by persons authorised to be present under 
                               the terms of Local Rules for each Building, e.g. building rules may allow 
                               cleaners to be present out of hours. Some buildings will allow members of 
                               the public to attend lectures and other functions out of hours. 
            Medium Risk Work  Medium Risk work may only be undertaken if there is at least one other 
                               authorised person either in the same room or in an adjoining room within 
                               earshot and, preferably, also within sight. (In special circumstances, e.g. 
                               certain work by authorised Estates & Buildings personnel, workers may be 
                               unaccompanied providing they are in direct radio communication with their 
                               base station for the duration of the work.)  
                               Medium Risk work may only be undertaken either - by persons authorised 
                               by the Head of School or a Subject Group Convenor for the area 
                               concerned.  
            High Risk Work     These operations must never be undertaken outside normal working 
                               hours unless: 
                                  A special arrangement has been made to ensure the presence of a 
                                   first aider available either within the building or on radio call on 
                                   campus. 
                                  The Head of School or the Subject Group Convenor for the area 
                                   concerned has approved the work. 
                                  At no time during the work procedures are there less than two persons 
                                   present together in any high-risk location. 
             
            These are extracts from AstonUniversity - Policy for working in University buildings outside 
            normal working hours. 
             
             
            Smoking Policy 
             
            Under the University’s smoking policy, rooms in all University premises except those otherwise 
            indicated in the full 'Policy' are designated as' NO SMOKING' areas.  All School rooms are 
            classified as 'NO SMOKING' areas.  
             
             
             
                                                       5 
             
                                                                           
                                                    SAFE OPERATING PROCEDURES 
                                                                           
                Equipment in the School can only be operated if it has valid Safe Operating Procedure, which 
                must include an Emergency Shutdown Procedure.  The only exceptions will be in cases which 
                are considered trivial or those in which a satisfactory reason for exemption has been proposed 
                and accepted. 
                 
                                                             RISK ASSESSMENT 
                 
                The fundamental steps of risk assessment are   
                                        
                1.     Hazard Identification - Whatever method is used it needs to show that all hazards have 
                       been considered.  The two most common approaches to this are  
                       a. a team of trained risk assessment personnel or 
                       b. less competent individuals/teams working with the aid of a very comprehensive hazard 
                           checklist to a prescriptive regime. 
                 
                2.     Who the assessment is for and who may be harmed - Risk assessments reflect 
                       competency, experience and training of individuals and groups and therefore the risk 
                       ranking will reflect this.  A number of risk assessments may therefore be required 
                       reflecting that what may be a relatively high-ranking risk for one individual could be low for 
                       another.   
                 
                3.     Evaluation of the risks - The risk related to a particular hazard is generally defined as a 
                       function of the severity of the possible harm for the particular hazard and the probability of 
                       occurrence of that harm.  Numerically based systems rank individual hazards in terms of 
                       risk and prioritise actions.  Alternative systems are simply based on low, medium and high 
                       rankings.  These systems inevitably have very large steps between rankings and whilst 
                       this does not lend itself well to prioritising remedial action, they do have the advantage of 
                       being relatively simplistic. 
                       
                4.     Identify and evaluate risk reduction options for each risk - All reasonable practical 
                       steps must be taken to minimise the level of risk and the risk assessment should show 
                       this.  The following is a list of control measures in order of effectiveness:- Elimination, 
                       Substitution by something less risky, Enclosure – enclose in a way that eliminates or 
                       reduces risks, Guarding or segregation of people, Safe systems of work that reduces the 
                       risk, Written procedures that are known and understood by those affected, Adequate 
                       supervision, Identification of training needs, Information/instruction (signs/handouts) and 
                       Personal protective equipment.  In many cases a combination of these measures is 
                       desirable.  
                 
                5.     Record findings - An auditable record of the risk assessment process must be kept.  It 
                       must show 
                 
                            the process by which all significant hazards have been identified 
                            the details of all significant hazards have been identified 
                            risk evaluations 
                            actions taken or proposed to reduce risks including training and Personal Protective 
                             Equipment (PPE) requirements 
                            timescales for any proposed actions 
                            estimates of residual risks 
                        any documentation that has been used in making this assessment 
                     The records must show that the risk assessment has been carried out in a competent logical 
                     manner and demonstrate suitable and sufficient steps have been taken. 
                                                                         6 
                 
                                                                           
                 
                6.    Set a strategy for reviewing and revising the assessment - Risk assessment strategies 
                      should be revised regularly to ensure control measures are still adequately controlling 
                      therisk.  When significant changes are detected the risk assessment process is repeated. 
                      
                      
                School Strategy for Risk Assessment 
                 
                EAS has now adopted the following three-tier approach to risk assessment, which recognises 
                that the greater the risk the more rigorous the assessment procedure needs to be.   
                 
                Level 1  Recognised Low Risk environments are evaluated using a simplistic approach of low, 
                             medium and high severity and probability model.  Generic assessment of some areas 
                             may be possible.  Any situations that subsequently are shown not to be low risk are 
                             subjected to the next level of assessment.   
                 
                Level 2  Risk assessments for non-low risk processes/equipment/areas that cannot be 
                             adequately dealt with by the simplistic approach described above, are assessed using 
                             a numerically based risk assessment system the School has developed.  A 
                             comprehensive hazard template has been developed against which risk data for 
                             individual hazards is entered and action prioritised.  Any 
                             processes/equipment/areas/situations in which the risks have been classified as 
                             substantial or intolerable by this system will be subjected to the next level of 
                             assessment. 
                 
                Level 3  Risks, which have been classified as substantial or intolerable will be subjected to a 
                             further analysis by a University risk assessment team.  
                       
                The different forms/workbooks to be used when assessing the risks at each level are available 
                from the School Safety Adviser. The following hazards have their own specific assessment 
                forms:- Chemical and Biological Hazards, Noise, Display Screen Equipment and Manual 
                Handling. 
                 
                 
                                                  HEALTH AND SAFETY INFORMATION 
                 
                Each Subject Group has its own health and safety information.  EAS has produced a number of 
                booklets relating to specific hazards.  A brief synopsis of each follows in this handbook.    
                 
                                                                         7 
                 
                                                                           
                                                    SUMMARY OF SAFETY RULES 
                 
                              TREAT SAFETY AS A MATTER OF PARAMOUNT IMPORTANCE. 
                 
                Other instructions and suggestions are to be found in subsequent sections of this book and 
                specific hazard related School booklets.  Everyone must observe the following rules: 
                 
                      No equipment can be operated unless it has valid Safe Operating Procedure, which must 
                       include an Emergency Shutdown Procedure.  The only exceptions are in cases which are 
                       considered trivial or those in which a satisfactory reason for exemption has been 
                       proposed and accepted.  Ensure that a risk assessment has been made of the activity. 
                      Learn the various emergency procedures. 
                      Know the location of the nearest telephone, fire alarm, fire-fighting equipment, first aid box 
                       and eye wash station. Ensure that all these appliances are maintained in a satisfactory 
                       state. 
                      Know the location of main control valves, stopcocks and switches. 
                      Use all appropriate protective devices. Eye protection must be used in designated 
                       laboratory areas at all times.  Laboratory coats must also be worn when in laboratories. 
                      Ensure that adequate information and instruction is available before any process or 
                       handling procedure is attempted.  
                      Ensure that adequate warnings are always displayed, and that warning notices, which no 
                       longer apply, are removed. 
                      Ensure that all equipment intended to run unattended for long periods, e.g. overnight, is 
                       safely and securely assembled, and bears a notice showing the contents, condition and 
                       emergency shutdown procedure. 
                      Do not smoke, eat or drink in designated laboratory areas. 
                      Do not wear laboratory coats in places where people eat or drink. 
                      Do not leave fire-stop doors open. 
                      Ensure that all hazardous materials are properly stored, and in the minimum quantities 
                       consistent with the work being undertaken. 
                      Report to the Subject Group Safety Adviser all accidents involving personal injury, and all 
                       incidents which might have had serious consequences 
                      Between certain limits (approx. 4.8% to 13.5% by volume of gas) gas and air form 
                       flammable mixtures.  If you suspect a gas leak you should extinguish all sources of 
                       ignition. Do not switch on, or off, electrical apparatus/appliances.  Inform the University 
                       Security staff if the situation seems to be an emergency - telephone 222. 
                      Doorways, gangways, corridors, and emergency exits are unobstructed. 
                      Working areas are kept clean and uncluttered. 
                      Waste chemicals are not allowed to accumulate. 
                      If substances need to be stored in a fridge ensure that it is appropriate.  In the case of 
                       chemicals it must be sparkproof. 
                                                                         8 
                 
                                                                                   
                                                                    CHEMICAL SAFETY 
                   
                  The hazard from a substance or preparation is defined as its intrinsic ability to do you harm.  
                  This could include (and it’s not an exhaustive list) its toxicity, temperature, flammability, 
                  reactivity, asphyxiant properties, and even its ability to harm the environment. 
                   
                  How much harm it will actually do is a complex function of its physical form, the route of entry to 
                  the body, the quantity that was involved, its intrinsic properties and the response of the body.  
                  Never forget that you are in more danger standing knee deep in a completely non-toxic dust 
                  than you are if you have the most toxic substance in the world sealed in a robust container in 
                  your pocket.  Substances have other properties – they may be very reactive, so may present a 
                  considerable hazard in taking part in runaway reactions or even explosions.  They may be 
                  highly flammable, and pose a threat in the form of fire. 
                   
                  Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) Assessment 
                   
                  The COSHH Regulations provide a legal framework to protect people against health risks from 
                  hazardous substances used at work. 
                  Complying fully with COSHH involves: 
                         assessing the risks to health arising from work with chemicals. Fundamentally, the risk 
                          associated with a particular activity is function of the potential severity of injury of a hazard 
                          and the probability of occurrence of that harm.  COSHH risk assessments are exactly the 
                          same, although the terminology may vary. 
                         deciding what precautions are needed. No work should be undertaken which could 
                          expose employees to hazardous substances, without first considering the risks and the 
                          necessary precautions. Unless the risks have been judged correctly, it is unlikely that the 
                          right precautions have been decided upon; 
                         preventing or controllingexposure; If it is reasonably practicable, you must prevent 
                          exposure by:  
                          1.    changing the process or activity so that the hazardous substance is not required or 
                                generated; or  
                          2.    replacing it with a safer alternative, or  
                          3.    using it in a safer form, eg pellets instead of powder. 
                         ensuring that control measures are used and maintained properly, and that any safety 
                          procedures which have been laid down are followed;  
                         monitoring exposure of workers to hazardous substances and carrying out appropriate 
                          health surveillance, where the assessment has shown these are necessary or where 
                          COSHH lays down specific requirements;  
                         ensuring that employees are properly informed, trained and supervised. 
                   
                  The first step of the assessment is to determine the hazard category and exposure potential of 
                  the substances and products of the process/reaction.  The School has developed a COSHH 
                  assessment procedure based on the The Royal Society of Chemistry model and this must be 
                  used for your assessment and to record your findings. 
                   
                  Separate assessments will probably be needed for the different routes of entry into the body – 
                  inhalation, skin absorption, ingestion etc.  Suppliers of chemicals are legally obliged to provide 
                  Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) to their customers.  Most of the safety information you 
                  need when completing assessments is there. 
                   
                   
                   
                   
                                                                                 9 
                   
                                                        
            Chemical Agents Directive 
             
            The Chemical Agents Directive (CAD) requires employers to protect workers from certain health 
            and safety risks arising from chemical agents present in the workplace and from work activities 
            involving chemical agents.  The term Chemical Agents is defined very widely and means any 
            natural or artificial substance or mixture of substances whether in solid, liquid or gas form. The 
            Directive is concerned with fire, explosion and health risks from chemical agents and applies to 
            all industrial and commercial sectors. 
             
            COSHH deals with the health risks and the recently introduced Dangerous Substance and 
            Explosive Atmosphere Regulations (DSEAR) deals with the safety risks classified under the 
            Chemicals (Hazard Information and Packaging for Supply) Regulations 2002 (S.I. 2002/1689) 
            (CHIP 3) as: explosive, oxidising, extremely flammable, highly flammable or flammable.  
            Similar to COSHH a risk assessment of the safety aspects is required. 
             
            DSEAR applies to any substance or preparation (mixture of substances) with the potential to 
            create a risk to persons from energetic (energy-releasing) events such as fires, explosions, 
            thermal runaway from exothermic reactions etc.  Such substances, which are known in DSEAR 
            as dangerous substances, include: petrol, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), paints, varnishes and 
            certain types of combustible and explosive dusts produced in, for example, machining and 
            sanding operations. 
             
            Reaction Categories 
            As part of the full risk assessment, consideration must also be given to the level of supervision 
            required when reactions are taking place.  This must take account of the experimental 
            procedure(s) being used.  An appropriate level of supervision should be assigned according to 
            the following simple scheme:- 
             
            A    This activity must be directly supervised 
            B    The advice and approval of your supervisor must be sought before the task started 
            C    The work involves risks requiring careful attention to the safety related aspects of it. The 
                 worker has been trained in the task and has demonstrated competence  
            D    Tasks in this category carry no undue risks 
             
            Reactions involving substances which are carcinogens, mutagens or teratogens; pose risk of 
            serious eye damage; are pyrophoric, very highly toxic, or pose an explosion risk are by default 
            placed in category A. 
             
            Eye Protection- It is a legal requirement to wear eye protection in laboratories.   
             
            Safety glasses must be worn as an absolute minimum.  Normal prescription glasses do not offer 
            protection enough, and protective over-goggles must be worn with them.  Spectacles should be 
            worn in preference to contact lenses, which could trap chemicals between the lens and the eye.  
            Soft lens in particular can also absorb solvent vapour. 
             
            Lab. Coats 
             
            Lab. coats must be worn in laboratories, must be regularly laundered and not worn outside lab. 
            areas. 
             
                                                      10 
             
                             
                         CRYOGENS 
       
      Although this is not an exhaustive list, you should be aware of the following key hazards 
      associated with using liquid nitrogen and liquid helium. 
       
      Asphyxiation – due to the displacement of air. 
       
      One of the main dangers associated with both liquid helium and liquid nitrogen is the risk of 
      asphyxiation, particularly when used or stored in poorly ventilated areas.  This can be rapid, and 
      there are likely to be no obvious warning signs to the victim.  There are no physical symptoms of 
      distress, and the function of the brain is seriously impaired in an oxygen deficient atmosphere, 
      without the person’s knowledge. It can take as little as two breaths in an oxygen deficient 
      atmosphere to cause unconsciousness, and death will occur within minutes.  Below around 
      10%, death or brain damage may be inevitable, even if the casualty is rescued and resuscitation 
      is attempted.  The atmosphere normally contains approximately 21% oxygen by volume. 
      Atmospheres containing less than 18% oxygen are potentially dangerous, and entry into 
      atmospheres containing less than 20% oxygen is not recommended.  Accident records show 
      that for every person who is overcome and dies in an atmosphere that does not support life, 
      statistically, more than one additional person dies, unsuccessfully attempting a rescue.  It is 
      probable that a visible vapour cloud is significantly depleted in oxygen. Personnel should be 
      instructed never to enter a vapour cloud.   
          
      An assessment of the expected oxygen depletion should be made using the volume of room, 
      liquid nitrogen usage etc. to determine whether this likely to fall below 20%. 
       
      Consideration should be given to the installation of oxygen deficiency monitors and alarms in 
      areas where significant amounts of cryogens are being used or stored, particularly when poor 
      ventilation or confined spaces are involved. 
       
      Condensation of liquid oxygen 
         
      Since oxygen has a higher boiling point than nitrogen, it can condense into liquid nitrogen.  
      Fortunately it is a light blue colour, so if it has condensed in a significant quantity into an open 
      dewar of nitrogen it is obvious.  Be aware that liquid oxygen is a serious fire hazard, and pure 
      oxygen can cause organic materials to ignite spontaneously or explode.  Also, the liquid that 
      forms and runs off a nitrogen delivery tube from a dewar when you are discharging nitrogen is 
      rich in oxygen.  Hence naked flames etc. are prohibited at nitrogen transfer points.  Liquid that is 
      allowed to dribble onto clothing can take a very long time to disperse, and the individual is in 
      considerable danger while their clothing is rich in oxygen. 
       
      Condensation of water 
          
      Most of the time, the air is well laden with water vapour, and in consequence, wherever you 
      are using cryogens, you will have water vapour condensing out and often forming significant 
      ice burdens on pipes, etc. This can give rise to a risk of electrocution from ice forming, water 
      condensing and water dripping onto nearby electrical equipment. 
       
      Changes in material properties 
         
      We have all seen people smashing rubber hose, etc, when doing demonstrations with liquid 
      nitrogen.  In polymers this is primarily due to the fact that cryogenic liquids take the material well 
      below its glass transition temperature, into a regime where it is brittle.  It recovers if it is warmed 
      up – but it may break if it is disturbed while cold, or if it contains residual stresses.  Flooring may 
      crack and cause a trip hazard. Carpeting appears to be just as vulnerable as lino. Pneumatic 
      tyres on vehicles that are exposed to liquid nitrogen may explode.  Carbon steels (i.e. not 
      stainless) are body centred cubic, and also become dramatically more brittle at low 
                           11 
       
                                                                           
                temperatures. They are not suitable for low temperature service.  The drains cannot cope 
                with liquid nitrogen – the materials can be damaged - expensively.  Even if the damage is not 
                immediately apparent, think what might happen when chemicals are disposed of down the drain 
                and where subsequently this leaked material will go. Damage to the insulation on electric 
                cables can produce an electrocution hazard. 
                      
                Exposure to cold gases  
                 
                Short exposures to cold gas vapour leads to discomfort in breathing whilst prolonged inhalation 
                can produce serious affects on the lungs and can trigger asthmatic attacks in susceptible 
                individuals. 
                 
                Blockage of outlets from cryogenic containers 
                        
                Liquid helium can readily cool air below its freezing point, which may lead to blockages in your 
                apparatus.  It is possible that an explosion may result, because the helium will evaporate before 
                the blockage clears itself.  Blockages can form with nitrogen as well, if ice forms in sufficient 
                quantity.  Ice plugs are normally melted using hot air. 
                 
                Burns 
                      
                Liquefied gases, particularly when soaked into clothing, can produce burns that are similar to 
                heat burns.  Unprotected skin may also stick to un-insulated items and flesh may be torn on 
                removal.  More prolonged contact can cause the flesh to freeze.  While frozen it will appear 
                yellow and waxy, and will probably not hurt, but when it thaws, it is likely to give rise to intense 
                pain.  Such burns require immediate medical attention.  Persistent, superficial contact with liquid 
                nitrogen can also give rise to chilblains – itchy, red, irritated patches of skin on the hands. 
                 
                Reducing the Risks 
                 
                      Consider removing the problem altogether, which may be achieved by having less 
                       cryogen in the space (e.g., not leaving the dewar in the room). 
                      Ensure that cryogen from your apparatus is vented to a space that is large enough to 
                       accept it without threatening the oxygen level. 
                      Ensure the ventilation level is adequate to disperse the gas (but check on the status of the 
                       ventilation system at night or at weekends). 
                      Reduce the probability of accidental release by ensuring the stability of dewars, 
                       maintaining the floor in good condition, ensuring personnel are trained, using labels and 
                       diagrams, etc, to remind the forgetful. 
                      Impose procedural control – such as prohibiting the transport of cryogens in a lift along 
                       with personnel, prohibiting the transfer of cryogens at night, unless at least two people are 
                       present. 
                      Suitable gloves should be worn when handling very cold materials.  Gloves for usage 
                       when handling cryogens should be readily removable and special care should be taken to 
                       ensure that the cryogens cannot enter the glove via the cuff area. 
                 
                                                                         12 
                 
                                                                           
                                                  DISPLAY SCREEN EQUIPMENT (DSE) 
                 
                Work involving DSE must comply with the requirements of the Display Screen Equipment 
                Regulations 1992.  The University has prepared Guidelines on the Regulations together with 
                three questionnaires relating to DSE use, the first of which is a self-assessment form, which 
                helps determine whether a worker is a ‘user’ under the Regs.  This assessment is based upon a 
                simple calculation involving the type of work and method of working and the number of hours of 
                DSE-related work undertaken per week.  If a worker is assessed as a ‘user’, then his or her 
                workstation and ‘user interface’ are assessed for compliance with the Regs using further 
                questionnaires. 
                 
                Under the Regulations ‘users’ of DSE are entitled to have their eyesight tested and to have their 
                workstations assessed to ensure that these comply with certain minimum standards. Eyesight 
                problems, although important (eye strain and associated headaches can be unpleasant), are not 
                causes for major concern, and radiation hazards (from monitors, etc.) have now been 
                discounted by many authorities as representing a significant risk. 
                 
                However, it is musculo-skeletal disorders of the back and upper limbs, painful, severely 
                debilitating disorders such as RSI (repetitive strain injury) associated with the hands and wrists 
                which are considered to be very much the major issue.  It is therefore important that proper 
                consideration be given to the design of the job, the layout of the workstation and the suitability 
                of the equipment that comprises the workstation and an assessment of these elements is made.  
                 
                The primary requirements for a satisfactory workstation include the provision of a good quality 
                adjustable chair, a desk with a sufficiently large ‘knee-hole’ and a good-sized working surface - 
                especially depth, to accommodate a reasonably large-screened adjustable monitor and an 
                ergonomically satisfactory keyboard and mouse.  The workstation should be placed so that 
                reflections on the monitor screen can be eliminated or reduced to acceptable levels. 
                 
                Be aware that portable computers, laptops have comparatively poor ergonomics.  The 
                keyboards are often less than full size and not properly angled.  The LCD screens are an 
                integral part of the computer and have a more limited angle of view compared to a CRT monitor. 
                 
                Display Screen Equipment User’s General Check List 
                When using your display for the first time today: 
                      Raise or lower your seat until your forearms are horizontal.  Make sure your wrists are 
                       straight when your hands are on the keyboard. 
                      Sit right back on your chair so that the back rest can support you. 
                      Form a relaxed curve in your lower back and adjust your backrest to provide support 
                       when in this position. 
                      Use a footrest if your feet do not comfortably touch the floor. 
                      Remove any obstacle under your desk that prevents you sitting in an upright position. 
                      Position your copy stand close to your screen, e.g. the same height and viewing 
                       distance and next to the display screen. 
                      Set your display viewing distance to suit screen characters and copystand text size. 
                      Check that you can reach your copy stand, without leaning forward, if you need to turn 
                       pages regularly. 
                      Adjust your screen and copystand angle to suit your sitting position. 
                      If you are reading from hardcopy but do not use a copystand, offset your display slightly 
                       so that you don't need to lean forward to read from the document. 
                      Adjust the brightness control to suit the office lighting level. 
                      Rest your arms and shoulders whenever your work routine allows. 
                When taking a work break or at the end of the day: 
                      Exercise your legs and back by stretching and walking. 
                      Try to avoid excessive wrist and arm activities, such as writing or knitting, during your 
                       work break. 
                                                                         13 
                 
                                                                           
                      Try to rest your eyes by avoiding strenuous eye activities such as reading small print. 
                      If you sit during your break adopt informal postures - but remember not to slouch. 
                When using your display after a 2-3 hour work session: 
                      Check your workstation has not become disorganised, forcing you to sit in an awkward 
                       position. 
                      Adjust your brightness control if the light levels have altered since you started work. 
                      Move your screen and document holder back* a little and adjust their angle to suit.         
                       (* i.e. moving them away could help most (potentially long-sighted) users) 
                      Lower window blinds if sunlight is causing glare. 
                 
                Display Screen Equipment User’s General Check List 
                Are you sitting comfortably? 
                      Try not to slouch - keep the curve in your lower back. 
                      Adjust your backrest - support your lower back. 
                      Sit right back in your chair - let the back rest support you. 
                      Remove obstructions - don't let obstructions prevent you from sitting upright at your 
                       desk. 
                      Organise your workstation - place frequently used objects and equipment within easy 
                       reach, and limit twisting movements of spine. 
                      Place documents in holders where possible - don't lean forward to read hardcopy. 
                      Break up your DSE work - use informal postures when not working. 
                      Get some exercise - during breaks stretch your legs. 
                Are your arms and shoulders comfortable? 
                      Adjust your seat height - make sure your forearms are horizontal. 
                      Align hands with forearms - try to work with wrists straight. 
                      Keep your wrist as straight as possible when using the mouse. 
                      Use a footrest if your seat is too high & your feet don't comfortably reach the floor. 
                      Adjust your screen angle to suit your sitting height. 
                      Rest your arms whenever your routine allows. 
                      Avoid arm and wrist activities, such as writing, during rest breaks 
                Can you read the screen? 
                      Place the copystand close to your display 
                      Adjust the copystand height - this should match display height. 
                      Adjust your display height to minimise head/neck movement. Screen and angle of 
                       viewing may be different for touch/copy typists (who look mainly at their copy) and non-
                       touch (untrained!) typists (who also spend time looking at the keyboard!). 
                      Vary your viewing distance occasionally - this could be done by moving the display 
                       slightly after 2 to 3 hours of continuous working. 
                      Sit sideways to windows - in particular, avoid windows behind you. 
                      Use window blinds on sunny days 
                      Clean your DSE screen regularly using approved cleaners only. 
                      Adjust the brightness of display when light levels change 
                      Rest your eyes during work breaks - don't read small print! 
                 
                For further information see the School’s DSE booklet.  If you require DSE assessment contact 
                your Subject Group Safety Adviser who will arrange this for you. 
                                                                         14 
                 
                                                                           
                                                         ELECTRICAL SAFETY 
                 
                All electrical equipment and wiring must be in accordance with the ELECTRICITY AT 
                WORK REGULATIONS 1989.  These are far-reaching and extensive and include many 
                additional items not previously contained in the IEEE regulations.  NO EQUIPMENT SHOULD 
                BE IN USE IF IT DOES NOT MEET THE REGULATIONS. 
                All voltages are now included from 400KV to a 6 volt battery; the main criteria is to test whether 
                DANGER EXISTS (the risk of injury).  All electrical equipment whenever manufactured, 
                purchased or installed, must conform even if its manufacture or installation pre-dates the 
                regulations. 
                No students are permitted to undertake any wiring of HV or mains equipment, unless this has 
                been previously authorised by an appropriate Electronics Technician.  In these circumstances 
                the technician must check the work afterwards and before connection to any power supply.  
                There are special procedures, which must be followed when on live equipment.  Under no 
                circumstances must students work on live equipment. 
                Do not interfere internally with any instruments.  Only a competent person with the technical 
                knowledge, experience and necessary skill should undertake or carry out any wiring or repair 
                work.  Remember, if it is not working, contact a person in authority. Accidents involving 
                electricity are quite often fatal.  A high degree of protection is normally afforded by following 
                these established safety techniques:- 
                      Design and installation by competent personnel 
                      Earthing of metal work which could become live under fault conditions 
                      Mechanical protection of conductors / cables 
                      Fuses or circuit breakers to protect equipment from excess current and to allow safe 
                       isolation. 
                      Residual current circuit breakers 
                      Safe systems of work, which may include a permit to work system for certain 
                       equipment/procedures and electrical lockout. 
                      Routine maintenance of equipment. 
                      Safety inspections of equipment, including regular visual inspections supplemented by 
                       formal electrical testing at prescribed intervals.  
                      Using electrical tools, which are appropriately insulated. 
                      Ensuring flexible cables are firmly clamped at the ends, and damaged or frayed cables 
                       are replaced. 
                 
                Electric Shocks 
                 
                The following advice is given by the St. John Ambulance, 
                 
                The first priority with electric shock is to remove the source of current, DO NOT TOUCH THE 
                CASUALTY UNTIL THE ELECTRICITY SOURCE IS REMOVED. Switch it off at the supply 
                (meter) if possible, otherwise remove the plug or pull the cable from the casualty. If this is not 
                possible push the casualty's limb away from the source with a wooden pole whilst standing on 
                an insulating material, i.e. phone book. Always ensure your personal safety.  
                 
                To receive a shock, you require two points of contact with a voltage difference between them, 
                such as live to earth or neutral.  A current that flows from hand to hand, across the chest region, 
                presents great danger to heart function, though it is not in fact the worst; left hand to chest or 
                foot is potentially more serious but less likely to occur in a laboratory.  As little as 100 mA of 
                current can produce heart fibrillation when the current is applied directly to the heart tissue.  
                Current as low as 50 mA can cause death.   
                 
                 
                                                                         15 
                 
                                                                           
                Electrical Testing 
                 
                The safe use of electricity and electrical equipment is controlled by the Electricity at Work 
                (EAW) Regulations 1989.  They require that ‘precautions be taken against the risk of death and 
                injury.  Under these Regulations, the University (via Estates) is responsible for checking all the 
                electrical services and wiring – from the sub-stations through to the electrical in each room. The 
                School makes arrangements to ensure that its own electrical equipment is both tested and 
                maintained, and that equipment on hire or loan is similarly safe.   
                 
                The HSE recommend that user of any electrical equipment should visually inspect it on each 
                time before use.  They should look critically for signs that the equipment is not in sound 
                condition, and particularly for the following:- 
                 
                    Damage (apart from light scuffing) to the cable sheath – cuts, burns, splitting etc. 
                    Damage to the plug – cracked case, bent pins etc. 
                    Inadequate joints, including taped joints in the cable; 
                    That the outer sheath of the cable is not effectively secured where it enters the plug or the 
                       equipment.  Obvious evidence of this would be if the coloured insulation of the internal 
                       cable cores were showing; 
                    That the equipment has been subjected to conditions for which it is not suitable, e.g. it is wet 
                       or excessively contaminated; 
                    If there is damage to the external equipment casing or there are some loose parts or 
                       screws; 
                 
                Classification of Equipment   
                 
                Class I equipment is the most common type; its safety depends on the integrity of its one layer 
                of insulation and the earth bonding of its metalwork.  
                Class II equipment, often marked with a ‘double square’, depends on the provision of additional 
                insulation.  Class IIA(All-insulated) has two layers (or equivalent) of insulation, one of which 
                covers or comprises the outer casing so that metalwork cannot be touched.  In Class IIB 
                (Double-insulated) the equipment has all exposed metalwork separated from the conductors 
                by two layers of insulation so that the metalwork cannot become live.  There is no earth 
                connection and the operator's safety depends on the integrity of the two layers of insulation.   
                Class III equipment operates on safety extra low voltage (SELV) i.e. at a voltage not exceeding 
                50V AC between conductors or to earth. 
                 
                Residual Current Devices (RCD’s) 
                 
                An RCD is a device, which detects faults in an electrical system and quickly switches off the 
                supply.  Terms sometimes used to describe RCDs include Residual Current Circuit Breakers 
                (RCCBs) and Earth Leakage Circuit Breakers (ELCBs).  RCDs are best used when they are 
                built into the mains switchboard or the socket-outlet, as this guarantees that the power supply 
                cables are continually protected.  If this is not possible, a plug incorporating an RCD or a plug-in 
                RCD adaptor can be used. 
                 
                RCDs have a test button to check that their mechanism is functioning correctly.  If an RCD trips, 
                it is a sign that there is a fault and the electrical system should be checked before it is used 
                again 
                 
                Consult the School’s safety booklet Electrical Safety for information about electrical safety. 
                                                                         16 
                 
                                                                      
                                                            FIRE SAFETY 
                                                                      
               The Fire Triangle 
                                                                              FUEL 
               For a fire to start, three things are 
                                                                        Flammable gases 
               needed:- a source of ignition, fuel, 
                                                                       Flammable liquids 
               and oxygen.  If a 
                                                                        Flammable solids 
               ny one of these is missing, a fire 
               cannot start.  Taking steps to avoid 
               the three coming together will 
               therefore reduce the chances of a 
               fire occurring. 
                
                
               Once a fire starts it can grow very 
               quickly and spread from one 
               source of fuel to another.  As it 
               grows, the amount of heat it gives 
               off will increase and this can cause 
                                                                                                          
               other fuels to self-ignite.  The                    OXYGEN                  IGNITION SOURCE  
               following paragraphs advise on 
                                                          Always present in the air            Hot surfaces 
               how to identify potential ignition 
                                                           Additional sources from         Electrical equipment 
               sources, the materials that might 
                                                            oxidising substances             Static electricity 
               fuel a fire and the oxygen supplies, 
                                                                                         Smoking/naked flames 
               which will help it to burn. 
                
                
               Identifying ignition sources 
                
                        smokers' materials, eg                                  lighting equipment, eg halogen 
                         cigarettes & matches.                                    lamps. 
                        naked flames.                                           hot surfaces and obstruction of 
                        electrical, gas or oil-fired                             equipment ventilation, e.g. 
                         heaters (fixed or portable)                              office equipment. 
                        hot processes eg  welding or                            friction, eg from loose bearings 
                         grinding                                                 or drive belts. 
                        cooking.                                                static electricity. 
                        engines or boilers.                                     metal impact (such as metal 
                                                                                  tools striking each other). 
                        machinery. 
                                                                                 chemical reaction
                        faulty or misused electrical 
                         equipment. 
                     
                    Identifying sources of fuel 
                     
                    Anything that burns is fuel for a fire.  Look for the things that will burn reasonably easily and 
                    are in sufficient quantity to provide fuel for a fire or cause it to spread to another fuel source.   
                    Some of the most common 'fuels' found in workplaces are:  
                     
                        flammable liquid based products                      plastics, rubber and foam such as 
                         such as paints, varnish, thinners                     polystyrene and polyurethane, eg 
                         and adhesives;                                        the foam used in upholstered 
                        flammable liquids and solvents                        furniture; 
                        flammable chemicals;                                 flammable gases such as 
                                                                               liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
                        wood, paper and card; 
                                                                               and acetylene; 
                                                                   17 
                
                                                                           
                          furniture, including fixtures, fittings                   wood shavings, offcuts, dust, 
                           and textiles;                                             paper & textiles. 
                          loose packaging material; and                            internal construction materials - 
                                                                                     areas of hardboard, chipboard, 
                          waste materials, in particular 
                                                                                     blockboard walls or ceilings, 
                           finely divided materials such as 
                                                                                     synthetic ceiling or wall coverings, 
                                                                                     such as polystyrene tiles.
                Identifying sources of oxygen 
                 
                The main source of oxygen for a fire is in the air around us.  In an enclosed building this is 
                provided by the ventilation system in use.  This generally falls into one of two categories: natural 
                airflow through doors, windows and other openings; or mechanical air conditioning systems and 
                air handling systems.  In many buildings there will be a combination of systems, which will be 
                capable of introducing/extracting air to and from the building. 
                 
                Additional sources of oxygen can sometimes be found in materials used or stored in a 
                workplace such as:- 
                 
                     some chemicals (oxidising materials),                        oxygen supplies from cylinder 
                      which can provide a fire with additional                      storage and piped systems, e.g. 
                      oxygen and so assist it to burn.  The                         oxygen used in welding processes or 
                      Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) will                        laboratories
                      give details of these properties. 
                 
                Fire extinguishers 
                 
                The type of extinguisher is identified by a colour code as indicated below.  Water extinguishers 
                are coloured signal red. Other extinguishers will be predominantly signal red with the 
                manufacturers label, a band or circle covering at least 5% of the surface area of the 
                extinguisher of a second colour to indicate the contents of the extinguisher.  
                 
                  Type of Fire 
                                       Colour               Recommended for                        DO NOT USE ON 
                  Extinguisher 
                                                     Wood, paper, textile and solid 
                    WATER               RED                                                 Liquid, electrical or metal fires 
                                                               material fires 
                                    RED with a 
                   POWDER                                Liquid and electric fires                      Metal fires 
                                   BLUE BAND 
                                    RED with a 
                     FOAM             CREAM                     Liquid fires                   Electrical and metal fires 
                                       BAND 
                   CARBON           RED with a 
                                                         Liquid and electric fires                      Metal fires 
                   DIOXIDE  BLACK BAND 
                For further information contact the Fire Safety Adviser, Dave White on ext. 4805. 
                                                                         18 
                       
                                                                           
                                                               GAS CYLINDERS 
                 
                Gases are often stored and supplied in high-pressure cylinders.  Liquefied or dissolved gases 
                are also supplied in cylinders at lower pressures.  Such cylinders are labelled and colour coded 
                for identification. 
                 
                Guide to the safe use of gas cylinders 
                 
                      Always transport cylinders using a suitable trolley with the cylinder valve closed. 
                      Check that the regulator being used is appropriate for the gas being used and cylinder 
                       pressure. 
                      Cylinders in use must be firmly supported in correctly designed racks or clamps, and fixed 
                       in place independent of the piping or pressure regulator.  Always store cylinders in safe 
                       and secure manner.  Notice that cylinders containing acetylene must be stored and used 
                       in an upright position. 
                      Never use grease or oil on valves, regulators or connections. 
                      Report any faulty cylinders or regulators to the Subject Group Safety Adviser . 
                      "Snifting", i.e. releasing a small amount of gas through the main cylinder valve to flush out 
                       the seating, must be done with the cylinder upright and securely supported. It must never 
                       be undertaken in a confined room or with toxic, inflammable or liquefied gases. 
                      If a cylinder key is required it must be readily available, preferably attached to the rig. 
                       Pressure regulator keys need not be available. 
                      If corrosive and/or toxic gases are in use a warning chart should be displayed.  
                      Copper piping should be used as far as possible for flammable gases but never for 
                       acetylene. 
                      Soft rubber tubing is prohibited for piping gases from cylinders. 
                      Pipework intended for use with corrosive, toxic or flammable gases should, if possible, be 
                       tested with air, nitrogen or carbon dioxide. 
                      Ventilation should be adequate for normal running and to allow for possible mishaps. 
                       Excess gas should not be vented into the room. There is a great danger of explosion with 
                       flammables, and even non-toxics such as nitrogen and carbon dioxide may cause 
                       drowsiness and possible asphyxiation. 
                      All cylinders, especially hydrogen cylinders, should be screened from sources of heat 
                       (including sunshine). 
                      Hydrogen cylinder valves should be full-on or full-off, otherwise leakage may occur. 
                      Special precautions should be taken as appropriate. 
                        
                 
                For additional information or help contact the University Gas Cylinder technicaian on Ext. 4772 
                or consult the School’s safety booklet Use of Gas Cylinders. 
                                                                         19 
                 
                                                                           
                                                             MANUAL HANDLING 
                 
                All manual handling work needs to comply with the requirements set out in the Manual Handling 
                Operations Regulations 1992.  Manual handling is defined in the Regulations as ‘the 
                transporting or supporting of a load (including lifting, putting down, pushing, pulling, carrying or 
                moving thereof) by hand or by bodily force’.  Manual handling is a major cause of injury at 
                work.Statistics show that handling currently accounts for over one third of all reported accidents 
                at work.  Over 73% of these handling accidents resulted in strains and sprains and almost 
                50% of all handling accidents involved back injury. 
                 
                                                                           
                The Approved Code of Practice, which accompanies the Regulations, contains much useful 
                advice on how to undertake an assessment of the risks associated with manual handling. 
                Appendix 1 of the Code of Practice is a detailed assessment guidelines filter. It helps to 
                concentrate the effort of assessment where it is needed by identifying handling operations that 
                warrant detailed examination by eliminating those activities that present only a trivial risk. 
                 
                One of the best ways to approach an assessment is to consider first the following hierarchy of 
                possible measures: 
                 
                      Avoid manual handling operations wherever this is reasonably practicable. 
                      Make an assessment of any hazardous manual handling operations that cannot be 
                       avoided. 
                      Reduce, as far as practicable, the risk of injury from these operations. 
                 
                The Regulations themselves don’t set specific requirements such as weight limits, but they do 
                give some guidance about weights to assist in assessing whether a task needs more attention.  
                These are the guidelines for lifting operations: 
                                                                                                                         
                 
                Note that these guidelines are for the average man and woman, in their prime and in good 
                health. They are based upon work activities involving relatively infrequent operations - say up to 
                30 operations per hour.  The above guidance is also suitable for carrying operations where the 
                load is held against the body and carried for no further than 10 m without resting. 
                 
                The Code of Practice also gives guidance on pushing and pulling operations.  For this and 
                further advice on the assessment procedure, consult the School safety booklet Manual 
                Handling. 
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                             
                                                                         20 
                 
                                                                              
                                                             MECHANICAL SAFETY 
                 
                Workshops 
                 
                Mechanical workshops can be very dangerous places especially for the untrained and 
                inexperienced.  If you know that you are likely to need to use workshop facilities talk to the workshop 
                technicians well in advance.  Some machine tools can be operated after only a small amount of 
                training, but others need a lot of training and experience to be operated safely.  General guidelines 
                for workshop safety are given below:- 
                 
                      Clothing  Wear lab coats/boilers suits in the workshops.  They should have close-fitting cuffs, 
                       no loose belts, be in good repair, and be worn buttoned or zipped up.  Synthetic fibre materials 
                       should not be used.  Remove ties, scarves, rings, watches, bracelets, necklaces, etc., that are 
                       loose and could possibly get caught in machinery. Wear safety shoes or strong leather type 
                       shoes in the workshop. Canvas shoes, sandals and other flimsy footwear provide no 
                       protection against injury and are not permitted.  Wear the special protective clothing, such as 
                       aprons, leggings, gloves, goggles, boots, provided in particular areas of the workshops such 
                       as Welding and Heat Treatment.  Wear eye protection both when operating a machine or 
                       process that may produce flying particles, and when passing through an area where such 
                       things are happening. 
                      Skin Care  Wear disposable gloves and/or barrier cream when handling potentially hazardous 
                       or dirty materials.  Be sure to wash thoroughly when you have finished.  Use the special-
                       purpose hand cleansing creams provided. 
                      Guards  It is illegal, as well as dangerous, to operate an inadequately guarded machine. 
                       Ensure that all guards, safety switches, etc., are correctly fitted and operational on any 
                       machine or piece of equipment, before you operate it.  Ask if you are not sure.  Report 
                       defective or missing guards and do not operate the machine until repairs have been effected.  
                      Machine Tools  Before starting, familiarise yourself with the method of quickly stopping the 
                       machine that you are controlling. Ask for assistance if you are at all unsure how to control the 
                       machine. Always give your full concentration to the job when operating a machine.  Stop the 
                       machine if you have to pause to talk to someone.  Stop the machine if you have to leave it 
                       unattended, even if it is only for a few seconds or a few metres distance. Always wear eye 
                       protection when operating a machine.  Make sure that any machine you operate is in good 
                       order, properly adjusted and lubricated.  If it appears to you not to be so, report it to your Tutor 
                       and do not operate the machine.  Stop the machine and isolate it electrically before cleaning it.  
                       Remove machinings with a brush, stick or other suitable implement.  Never use your bare 
                       hands.  Do not press buttons, turn handles or move levers on any machine, other than the one 
                       you are operating.  
                      Bench Work and Hand Tools  Keep the floor area around the bench clear. Always ensure 
                       that files have properly fitted handles of correct size.  If you do not, the tang may pierce your 
                       hand. Do not use tools which appear to be damaged.  Use a copper, hide or lead hammer or a 
                       soft drift, if you need to strike hard objects or machined surfaces. Hard-faced hammers on 
                       hardened surfaces could produce dangerous flying fragments. Use spanners of the correct 
                       size when tightening or slackening nuts and bolts.  Ill fitting spanners may fly off and injure 
                       you, as well as damaging the nut or bolt. 
                      General Behaviour  Always behave in a responsible manner. Pranks and horseplay can go 
                       wrong and cause injury.  Walk!  If you run in a workshop you may trip and fall on something, 
                       possibly causing injury. Make sure that there is someone else present when working in a 
                       workshop.  Do not work on your own; there will be no one to help you if you sustain an injury.  
                       Remember that you must not operate any machine or piece of power equipment in any section 
                       unless the tutor or technician in charge is present or their permission has been obtained and 
                       you have received the necessary training to enable you to carry out the work safely. 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                                                                           21 
                 
                                                                              
                Work Equipment Regulations 
                 
                'Work equipment’ covers any machinery, appliance, apparatus, tool or installation for use at work 
                and 'Use' relates to any activity associated with the work equipment, e.g. starting, stopping, 
                programming, servicing, cleaning  The Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1998 
                requires the following:-  
                 
                      SuitabilityWork equipment must be suitable for its intended purpose, and for the working 
                       conditions in which it will be used. 
                      MaintenanceAll work equipment must be maintained so that it is safe and does not put people 
                       at risk.  Maintenance should be performed by competent staff at regular intervals.  Where 
                       possible, preventative maintenance instructions should be used.  These are usually based on 
                       the equipment manufacturer's recommendations and if followed will help to reduce the risk of 
                       failure whilst the equipment is in use.  The PUWER guidance leaflet recommends that 
                       maintenance logs be kept. 
                      InspectionIn certain circumstances, inspection should be carried out to ensure that work 
                       equipment is, and continues to be, safe for use.  Any inspection should be performed by 
                       competent staff and a record kept. 
                      Specific RisksEquipment, which poses specific health and safety risks, should only be 
                       operated by suitably trained employees.  As well as this, the maintenance and repair of such 
                       equipment should also be restricted to those who are competent and have been specifically 
                       designated to perform the work. 
                      Information, Instructions and TrainingEmployers are required to provide adequate health 
                       and safety information, instruction, and training for every employee.  Written instruction on the 
                       use of work equipment and H&S issues should be provided. 
                      Dangerous Parts of MachineryEmployers must take measures to restrict access to 
                       dangerous parts of machinery.  There must be effective measures to prevent access to 
                       dangerous parts of machinery or stop their movement before an employee enters the 'danger 
                       zone' (defined as any area of risk under health and safety law).  The Regulations require a 
                       strict hierarchy of measures to be taken, e.g. if the provision of fixed guards does not fully 
                       reduce the risks then protection devices should be considered.  They advise that any 
                       protection devices should be suitable for their purpose and maintained as such, be of good 
                       construction, and in good repair.  Employees should be appropriately informed, instructed and 
                       trained, and if necessary, supervised whilst using dangerous machinery. 
                      Protection Against Specified HazardsThis regulation outlines controls for protection against 
                       the following hazard areas:Falling or ejected articles or substances,Component rupture or 
                       disintegration of work equipment parts, Unintended or premature discharges of gas, dust, or 
                       other substances, Over-heating and catching fire, and Unintended explosions.Protective 
                       measures should be implemented including measures to minimise hazardous effects and 
                       prevent such problems occurring. 
                      ControlsWhere appropriate, work equipment must be fitted with operating controls (which 
                       alter speed and pressure), stop controls and emergency stop controls. All controls must be 
                       easily accessible and clearly visible. 
                      StabilitySome equipment will need to be stabilised by clamping or otherwise where necessary 
                       for purposes of health and safety.  Machines which are usually in a fixed position, should be 
                       bolted down where possible. 
                 
                For further information about mechanical, machinery and workshop safety, consult the School’s 
                safety booklet Code of Practice for Mechanical Workshop Safety. 
                                                                           22 
                 
                                                                              
                                                                        NOISE 
                 
                Because the human ear is not equally sensitive to sounds at all frequencies, occupational noise is 
                measured in a way that stimulates the response of a healthy human ear.  This is generally referred 
                to as decibels with ‘A’ weighting, written dB(A).  It is not often appreciated that this decibel scale is 
                logarithmic and with every increase of 3 dB(A) the sound pressure is doubled.  Thus 85 dB(A) is 
                twice as loud as 82 dB(A) and four times louder than 79 dB(A).   
                      
                Loud noise can cause :- 
                      permanent damage to hearing.  (noise induced hearing loss is irreversible.) 
                      your hearing to become less sensitive. 
                      tinnitus (permanent ringing in the ears). 
                      breakdown of safe and effective communications 
                      fatigue and tiredness. 
                 
                Temporary, partial loss of hearing, which may persist for several hours, can be caused by brief 
                exposure to high noise levels.  Such exposure if repeated or prolonged may lead to permanent 
                hearing damage.  It is one of the most serious and widespread industrial diseases. 
                 
                The Noise at Work Regulations sets 85 dB(A) as the noise level at which employers are specifically 
                required to act on noise.  Noise surveys must be carried out and precautions recommended for 
                those areas where daily average noise exposure exceeds 85 dB(A). 
                If you are planning, or starting, any new ‘noisy’ activity contact the School Safety Adviser so that it 
                can be assessed. 
                "Nuisance" noise which might disturb concentration, e.g. from traffic or a noisy process next door, is 
                not in the range covered by the Regulations.  As a rough guide, an assessment of noise exposure is 
                needed wherever people have to shout or have difficulty in being heard clearly by someone about 2 
                metres away, or if they find it difficult to talk to each other.  This 2m distance relates to about 85 dB 
                (A) and a 1m distance relates to about 90 dB(A). 
                The main provisions of the Regulations are as follows:  
                      The employer is under a general duty to reduce the risk of occupational hearing damage to the 
                       lowest level reasonably practicable. 
                      Where daily personal noise exposure is likely to be at 85 dB(A) or above, noise level 
                       assessments must be made.  
                      Where employees are exposed to 85 to 90 dB(A) ear protectors must be provided although 
                       there is no statutory requirement to wear them.  
                      Where exposure is above 90 dB(A) the employer is obliged to reduce noise so far as 
                       reasonably practicable, by means other than ear defenders.  
                      So long as exposure is above 90 dB(A) the employer must enforce the use of ear protectors 
                       and employees must wear them.  
                      "Ear protection zones" where exposure is above 90 dB(A) must be clearly marked. 
                      Information must be provided to workers about risks to their hearing. 
                      The employer must ensure, in so far as is practicable, that all equipment provided as part of 
                       complying with these Regs. is correctly used and maintained.  
                 
                N.B.  When the Physical Agents (Noise) Directive is implemented in early 2006 it will tighten the 
                legal requirements by lowering the exposure action values by 5dB to 80 and 85dB(A).Contact the 
                School Safety Adviser if you think a noise assessment is required. 
                                                                           23 
                 
                                                                      
                                           PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE) 
                                                                      
               The main requirement of the PPE at Work Regulations 1992 is that personal protective equipment is 
               to be supplied and used at work wherever there are risks to health and safety that cannot be 
               adequately controlled in other ways. 
               PPE is defined in the Regulations as 'all equipment (including clothing affording protection against 
               the weather) which is intended to be worn or held by a person at work and which protects them 
               against one or more risks to his health or safety', e.g. safety helmets, gloves, eye protection, high-
               visibility clothing, safety footwear and safety harnesses.  Waterproof, weatherproof or insulated 
               clothing is subject to the Regulations only if its use is necessary to protect employees against 
               adverse climatic conditions that could otherwise adversely effect their health or safety.  
               In general, because the effectiveness of PPE can be easily compromised, e.g. by not being worn 
               properly, it should always be considered as the last resort and used only where other precautions 
               cannot adequately reduce the risk of injury.  Where PPE is the only effective means of controlling 
               the risks of injury or ill health and then employers must ensure that it is available for use at work - 
               free of charge.  Also, in many laboratory and workshop areas minimum PPE levels have been set to 
               reinforce control measures and working practices.  In chemical labs. for example there is a minimum 
               requirement to wear both safety spectacles and a lab. coat.   
                                               HAZARDS                                     CHOICES 
                   EARS         Noise - Assessments are made under 
                                 the Noise at Work Regulations 1989                Earplugs; Ear defenders. 
                                    Chemical or metal splash; Dust; 
                    EYES             Projectiles: Gas and Vapours:            Spectacles: Goggles; Face screens 
                                                Radiation  
                HEAD AND          Impact from falling or flying objects:       Helmets; Bump caps; Hats; Caps; 
                   NECK               Risk of head bumping; Hair             Sou’westers and cape hoods; Skull-
                                              entanglement                                    caps. 
                                                                               Disposable filtering face piece or 
                BREATHING  Dust; Vapour; Gas; Oxygen deficient 
                                                                            respirator; Half/full face respirator; Air-
                                              atmospheres 
                                                                               fed helmets; Breathing apparatus. 
                                   Temperature extremes; Adverse 
                                  weather; Chemical or metal splash;         Conventional or disposable overalls; 
               PROTECTING  Spray from pressure leaks or spray               Boiler suits; Donkey jackets; Specialist 
                THE BODY              guns; Impact or penetration;             protective clothing e.g. chain-mail 
                                Contaminated dust; Excessive wear or             aprons; High visibility clothing 
                                     entanglement of own clothing. 
                                Abrasion; Temperature extremes; Cuts 
               HANDS AND          and punctures; Impact; Chemicals;          Gloves; Gauntlets; Mitts; Wristcuffs; 
                   ARMS         Electric shock; Skin infection; Disease                      Armlets 
                                      or contamination; Vibration. 
                 FEET AND        Wet; Electrostatic build-up; Slipping;      Safety boots and shoes with steel toe 
                   LEGS          Cuts and punctures; Falling objects;         caps (and steel mid sole); Gaiters; 
                                 Metal and chemical splash; Abrasion.                   Leggings; Spats. 
               The above table lists the parts of the body you should consider when making a PPE assessment, 
               the associated hazard categories and the protection choices.  
                                                                    24 
                
                                                                              
                                                              PRESSURE SYSTEMS 
                 
                Pressure Systems Safety Regulations 2000 
                In order to accommodate the implementation of the European Pressure Equipment Directive (PED), 
                adopted in May 1997, the Pressure Systems and Transportable Gas Containers Regulations 1989, 
                have been revoked and replaced with new consolidated regulations, the Pressure Systems Safety 
                Regulations 2000.  
                The aim of PSSR is to prevent serious injury from the hazard of stored energy as a result of the 
                failure of a pressure system or one of its component parts.  The Regulations are concerned with 
                steam at any pressure, gases which exert a pressure in excess of 0.5 bar above atmospheric 
                pressure and fluids which may be mixtures of liquids, gases and vapours where the gas or vapour 
                phase may exert a pressure in excess of 0.5 bar above atmospheric pressure.  
                PSSR is concerned with the risks created by a release of stored energy through system failure.  
                With the exception of the scalding effects of steam, the Regulations do not consider the hazardous 
                properties of the contents released following system failure.  The properties of the stored contents 
                are of concern only to the extent that they may be liable to accelerate wear and cause a more rapid 
                deterioration in the condition of the system, so leading to an increased risk of failure.  The risk from 
                steam includes not only any possible deterioration in the condition of the system, which could 
                increase the risk of failure, but also its scalding effect in the event of release.  PSSR does not deal 
                with all the hazards arising from the operation of such a system, even though the contents may be 
                highly toxic.  These aspects are all subject to separate legislative requirements and will need 
                considering, along with other aspects when deciding on the level of precautions required.  
                Pressure Equipment Regulations 2002 (PER) 
                PER contain requirements for the design, manufacture and conformity assessment of certain types 
                of pressure equipment with a pressure greater than 0.5 bar gauge.  PER covers the supply and 
                putting into service of equipment that would also form whole or part of a pressure system, that falls 
                within the scope of PSSR.  
                PER divides pressure equipment into four major categories on the basis of two fundamental 
                hazards: 
                      The degree of danger from failure of the equipment (expressed by the product of the pressure 
                       of the fluid and the volume of the equipment or DN value for piping products).   
                      The degree of danger from this release of the fluid contained (based on classifications adopted 
                       in the directives on dangerous substances).  
                The regulations define three types of systems:  
                (a)    a system comprising a pressure vessel, its associated pipe-work and protective devices.  
                (b)    pipe-work with its protective devices to which a transportable pressure receptacle is, or is 
                       intended to be, connected.  
                (c)    a pipeline with its protective devices. 
                                                 
                 and these systems in turn are further sub-divided into minor, intermediate or major. 
                                                                           25 
                 
                                                                
                                                         RADIATION 
              
             Ionising Radiation 
              
             Radiation that produces ionisation in matter e.g. α particles, γ rays, X rays and neutrons.  When 
             these radiations pass through the body tissue, they have sufficient energy to damage DNA. 
                    
             To comply with the necessary registration procedures the Radiological Protection Officer (RPO) 
             MUST be consulted before commencing work involving any of these techniques. The member of 
             staff responsible for experimental work involving these techniques must make the necessary 
             arrangements for undergraduates.  A booklet entitled "Recommendations and Notes for the 
             Guidance of Departments Working with Radioactive Substances and Ionising Radiations", is 
             available from the University Safety Adviser (USA). 
              
             In the event of an accident involving radioactive contamination or exposure to X-rays or Laser 
             beams, the USA (telephone 4513) or the RPO (4776) must be contacted immediately. 
              
             Non-Ionising Radiations 
              
             Radiation that does not produce ionisation in matter. Examples are ultraviolet radiation, light, 
             infrared radiation and radiofrequency radiation. When these radiations pass through the tissues of 
             the body they do not have sufficient energy to damage DNA directly.   For advice on radiation 
             consult the School’s Safety booklet entitled ‘Radiation Safety’ 
              
             Radiation Protection Supervisor (RPS)Any School, or a constituent subject area, which uses 
             ionising radiations musthave an RPS, who will be appointed in writing by the University.The RPS 
             supervises work activities in the area(s) specified in the Local Rules,and assists in ensuring 
             compliance with the arrangements made by theUniversity in the Local Rules and other university 
             guidance on radiologicalsafety. 
             Local Radiation Assistant (LRA)LRA are appointed to provide day-to-day assistance to the RPS. 
             An LRA will be anemployee involved in ionising radiation work in a specified work area. 
              
             Lasers 
              
             Lasers produce electromagnetic radiation at wavelengths extending from 100 nm in the ultra-violet, 
             through the visible (400-700 nm), and the near infrared (700-1400 nm), to the far infrared (1400 nm 
             – 1 mm). Thus, the light emitted can be either visible or invisible. Lasers can be operated in a 
             number of different modes. Some lasers produce a continuous output and are known as continuous 
             wave or CW lasers. The power outputs of CW lasers are usually expressed in terms of watts (W). 
             Others operate in a pulsed mode producing short bursts of radiation. The power of the laser output 
             can vary from less than 1mW to many watts in some CW devices. The energy output of pulsed 
             lasers is generally expressed in joules (J) per pulse.  
              
             Because of the wide ranges possible for the wavelength, energy content and pulse characteristics of 
             laser beams, the hazards arising from their use varies widely. It is impossible to regard lasers as a 
             single group to which common safety limits can apply. A system of laser classification is used to 
             indicate the level of laser beam hazard and maximum Accessible Emission Levels (AELs) have 
             been determined for each class of the seven classes (1, 1M, 2, 2M, 3R, 3B & 4). 
              
             Class 1     Lasers that are safe under reasonably foreseeable conditions of operation, either 
                         because of the inherently low emission of the laser itself, or because of its engineering 
                         design such that it is totally enclosed and human access to higher levels is not possible 
                         under normal operation.  
                         NB If access panels of a totally enclosed system are removed for servicing etc then the 
                         laser product is no longer Class 1 and the precautions applicable to the embedded laser 
                         must be applied until the panels are replaced.  
                                                             26 
              
                             
       
      Class 1M   Laser products emitting in the wavelength range 302.5 nm to 4000 nm, whose total 
           output is in excess of that normally permitted for Class 1 laser products but because of 
           their diverging beams or very low power density do not pose a hazard in normal use and 
           comply with the measurement conditions for a Class 1M product. However they may be 
           hazardous to the eyes under certain conditions if gathering optics are used with them, 
           i.e. a) With a diverging beam if optics are placed within 100mm of the source to 
           concentrate/collimate the beam. or b) With a large diameter collimated beam viewed with 
           binoculars or a telescope. 
      Class 2:   Lasers that only emit visible radiation in the wavelength range from 400 nm to 700 nm 
           and whose output is less than the appropriate AEL. They are safe for accidental viewing 
           as eye protection is afforded by aversion responses, including the blink reflex. This 
           reaction may be expected to provide adequate protection under reasonably foreseeable 
           conditions of operation including the use of optical instruments for intrabeam viewing.  
      Class 2M:  Laser products that only emit visible radiation in the wavelength range 400 nm to 700 
           nm, whose total output is in excess of that normally permitted for Class 2 laser products 
           but because of their diverging beams or very low power density are safe for accidental 
           viewing during normal use and comply with the measurement conditions for a Class 2M 
           product. However they may be hazardous to the eyes under certain conditions if 
           gathering optics are used with them, i.e. a) With a diverging beam if optics are placed 
           within 100mm of the source to concentrate/collimate the beam. or 
           b) With a large diameter collimated beam viewed with binoculars or a telescope.  
      Class 3R:  Lasers that emit in the wavelength range from 302.5 nm to 1 mm where direct intrabeam 
           viewing is potentially hazardous but the risk is lower than for Class 3B lasers, and fewer 
           manufacturing requirements and control measures for the user apply. The AEL is 
           restricted to no more than five times the AEL of Class 2 for visible wavelengths and no 
           more than five times the AEL of Class 1 for other wavelengths. 
      Class 3B:  Lasers that are normally hazardous when direct intrabeam exposure occurs (i.e. within 
           the Nominal Ocular Hazard Distance, which is the distance within which the beam 
           irradiance or radiant exposure will exceed the appropriate MPE). Viewing diffuse 
           reflections is normally safe. Output levels must be less than the appropriate AELs for 
           Class 3B devices.  
      Class 4:   High power lasers that exceed the AELs for Class 3B products that are also capable of 
           producing hazardous diffuse reflections. They may cause skin injuries, could also 
           constitute a fire hazard and could cause hazardous fumes to be produced as well as 
           being a hazard to the eyes. Their use requires extreme caution.  
       
      Laser Protection Supervisor (LPS)Any School, or a constituent subject area, using lasers (Class 
      3b and above)must have one or more LPS, who will be appointed in writing by the University.The 
      LPS supervises work activities in the area(s) specified in the Local Rules,and assists in ensuring 
      compliance with the arrangements made by the University. 
       
      Local Laser Assistant (LLA)LLA provide day-to-day assistance to the LPS. An LLA will be 
      employee involved in non-ionising radiation work in a specified work area.
                            27 
       
                                                                              
                SLIPS, TRIPS AND FALLS 
                 
                Over a third of all major injuries reported each year are caused as the result of a slip or trip.  Slips 
                are 6 times more frequent than trips.  The HSE recommend adopting the following approach. 
                 
                1.     Look for slip and trip hazards around the workplace, such as uneven floors, trailing cables, 
                       areas that are prone to spillages. 
                2.     Decide who might be harmed and how.  Who comes into the workplace and are they at 
                       risk? 
                3.     Consider the risks.  Are the precautions already in place sufficient to deal with the risks? 
                4.     Record the findings. 
                5.     Regularly review the findings. 
                 
                Good working practice 
                 
                Ensure that conditions are right from the start.  Choose only suitable floor surfaces and ensure that 
                lighting levels are adequate.  Cleaning methods and equipment must be suitable for the type of 
                surface being treated. 
                 
                Carry out all necessary maintenance work, including inspection, testing, adjustment and cleaning at 
                regular intervals, taking care to ensure that additional slip and trip hazards are not created. 
                 
                Lighting should enable people to see obstructions, potentially slippery areas etc.  Floors should be 
                checked for loose finishes, holes and cracks, worn rugs and mats etc.  Obstructions and objects left 
                lying around can easily go unnoticed and cause a trip.  Try to keep work areas tidy and if 
                obstructions can’t be removed, warn people using signs or barriers.  Correct footwear can play an 
                important part in preventing slips and trips. 
                 
                Reducing the risk of slipping and tripping 
                 
                       HAZARD                                           SUGGESTED ACTION 
                                          Clean spills up immediately.  If the liquid is greasy ensure a suitable 
                Spillage of wet or dry cleaning agent is used. After cleaning the floor may be wet for some 
                      substances          time.  Use appropriate signs to tell people the floor is still wet and 
                                          arrange an alternative bypass route. 
                                          Position cables to avoid cables crossing pedestrian routes.  Use cable 
                    Trailing cables 
                                          covers to securely fix to surfaces.  Restrict access to prevent contact. 
                 Rubbish e.g. plastic 
                                          Keep areas clear.  Remove rubbish and do not allow it to build up. 
                          bags 
                                          Ensure that all flooring e.g. carpets, rugs, mats and lino, is securely fixed 
                        Flooring 
                                          and does not have curling edges.  Replace worn floor covering. 
                                          Assess the cause and treat accordingly e.g. treat chemically, devise an 
                   Slippery surfaces 
                                          appropriate cleaning method. 
                 Change from wet to Use suitable footwear.  Warn of risks using signs.  Locate doormats 
                   dry floor surface.     where changes are likely. 
                                          Improve lighting levels and placement of light fittings to ensure more 
                     Poor lighting. 
                                          even lighting of all floor areas. 
                   Changes of level.  Improve lighting levels.  Add apparent tread nosings. 
                         Slopes           Improve visibility.  Provide handrails.  Use floor markings. 
                                          Ensure that the correct type of footwear is used.  Particular attention 
                 Unsuitable footwear 
                                          should be paid to the type of sole. 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                           28 
                 
                                                          
                                               VACUUM SYSTEMS 
             
            Glass systems are particularly vulnerable and should be protected against the risk of implosion 
            should mechanical defects develop while the system is under vacuum.  Glassware under vacuum 
            must have a protective cover, e.g. cling-film to prevent flying glass.  Thin-walled or non-spherical 
            glass flasks should not be evacuated.  Also, all modifications and repairs to glass vacuum systems 
            can only be undertaken by an experienced glassblower.   
             
            Gas leaks from the chamber into the lab. may result depending on the gases used, may result in 
            explosion, toxic effects or asphyxiation.  Air leaks into the chamber, may produce potentially 
            explosive or toxic mixtures.  Ensure systems are leak free before introduction of process gases and 
            ensure that exhaust systems are working effectively and are properly ventilated. 
             
            Minimise mechanical shock by turning taps slowly when equalising a large pressure differential, 
            especially if a large bulb volume is involved.  Arrangements must be made to ensure that chemical 
            vapours condensed out and their ingress into the pumping system is prevented.   
             
            Liquid nitrogen traps on vacuum systems must only be filled after pumping down (to prevent O
                                                                                                2
            condensation).  Air must not be readmitted until the liquid  N2 reservoir has been removed. 
             
            Vacuum Pumps 
             
            All oil pumps must be used properly if they are to function efficiently.  This efficency is reduced if the 
            oil becomes thick (due to dissolved chemicals) and the metal surfaces become pitted (due to 
            exposure to corrosive materials).  You should be trained in the use of vacuum pumps but it is most 
            important to make certain that the vacuum system in the apparatus is discharged (i.e. the equipment 
            is returned to atmospheric pressure) before the pump is switched off.  This prevents suckback of oil 
            from the pump into the system.  Diffusion pumps are more complex in operation and an experienced 
            user must be consulted before you attempt any usage. 
             
            Consult the School’s H&S booklet Vacuum Systems for further information. 
                                                          
                                                          
                                              WORKING AT HEIGHTS 
                                                          
            Falls from height are one of the biggest killers of personnel in the workplace.  Work at height should 
            ideally be carried from a platform with suitable edge protection.  Occasionally this may not be 
            possible and a ladder may have to be used.  However, ladders are best used as a means of getting 
            to a workplace and should only be used as a workplace for light work of short duration.  It is 
            tempting to use a ladder for all types of work but you should always consider working from a 
            platform first, for example, a properly erected mobile scaffold tower or a mobile elevated working 
            platform. 
             
            Stepladders 
             
               Do not use the top platform of the stepladder unless it is designed with special handholds. 
               Ensure stepladders are stable and positioned on level ground and used in accordance with the 
                manufacturer’s instructions. 
               Do not walk down facing the wrong way. 
               Do not use stepladders leaning against a wall and do not overreach. 
               Be extremely careful if working off the short axis of a stepladder; this is not advised, since 
                stepladders have little stability along this axis - work off the long axis whenever possible. 
                                                        29 
             
                                                                              
                 
                 
                Ladders 
                 
                     Ladders should be in good condition and examined regularly for defects. 
                     They should be securely fixed so they cannot slip, usually by tying them at the top.  If this is not 
                      practicable then a person must be stationed at the foot of the ladder when in use to prevent it 
                      slipping, but this concession can only be applied when the ladder is < 20 feet long. 
                     The ladder should be angled to minimise the risk of slipping outwards.  As a rule of thumb it 
                      should be set ‘one out for every four up’ or 75 degrees. 
                     Access ladders should extend about 1m above the work platform, to provide a handhold for 
                      people getting on and off. 
                     Do not overreach.  If you are working from a ladder, make sure it is long enough and positioned 
                      to reach work safely. 
                     Do not climb or work off a ladder unless you can hold it safely. 
                     When in use ladders should not obstruct escape routes. 
                 
                ScaffoldTowers 
                 
                     It is essential that users ensure that scaffold towers are erected, used and dismantled safely.  
                      The main cause of accidents involving tower scaffolds are poor erection or misuse. 
                     A competent person must erect the scaffold in a manner fully compliant with the manufacturer’s 
                      instructions.  Also, any alterations or dismantling must be performed by a competent person.   
                     When a tower is left incomplete a warning notice ‘TOWER INCOMPLETE : DO NOT USE’ 
                      should be clearly displayed. 
                     Care should be taken to ensure loads are evenly distributed and do not exceed those set by the 
                      manufacturer.  Never climb on towers from the outside. 
                     The tower cannot be used until appropriate working platforms, toe boards, guard rails and 
                      stabilisers/outriggers have been fitted.  Never use general scaffold boards with a mobile 
                      structure.  Only use the correct size pre-formed platform supplied by the manufacture. 
                     Each time before using ensure the tower is vertical and the wheel brakes are on. 
                     When moving a tower check the following:- 
                      a.   check that there are no power lines or other overhead obstructions. 
                      b.   check that the ground is level and firm. 
                      c.   push or pull on the base – never use powered vehicles. 
                      d.   never move it while there are people or materials on the upper platforms. 
                     Traditional scaffold can only be erected by a qualified scaffolding contractor. 
                 
                Falling objects 
                 
                Care should be taken to prevent objects falling onto people.  This may involve the following:- 
                     Providing barriers, such as toe boards or mesh guards, to prevent items falling off the edge of a 
                      structure. 
                     Securing objects to the structure. 
                     Making sure that there are no loose objects and that all tools are secured. 
                     Creating an exclusion zone beneath areas where work is taking place and where necessary 
                      providing personnel with safety helmets. 
                     Clearly marking areas where work is being undertaken above with safety signs warning workers 
                      of the dangers. 
                     Using safety nets. 
                                                                           30 
                 
                             
                       WORK ENVIRONMENT 
                             
                             
      The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992 require that workplaces meet 
      certain basic standards. 
       
      Ventilation 
       
      Workplaces need to be adequately ventilated.  Fresh, clean air should be drawn from a source 
      outside the workplace, uncontaminated by discharges from flues, chimneys or other process 
      outlets, and be circulated through workrooms. 
       
      Ventilation should also remove and dilute warm, humid air and provide air movement, which 
      gives a sense of freshness without causing draught.  If the workplace contains process or 
      heating equipment or other sources of dust, fumes or vapours, more fresh air will be needed to 
      provide adequate ventilation. 
       
      Windows or other openings may provide sufficient ventilation but, where necessary, mechanical 
      ventilation systems should be provided and regularly maintained. 
       
      Temperatures in indoor workplaces 
       
      Comfort depends on air temperature, radiant heat, air movement and humidity.  Individual 
      personal preference makes it difficult to specify a thermal environment that satisfies everyone.  
      For workplaces where the activity is mainly sedentary, for example offices, the temperature 
      should normally be at least 16 degrees Celsius.  If the work involves physical effort it should be 
      at least 13 degrees Celsius (unless other laws require a lower temperature). 
       
      Work in hot or cold environments 
       
      The risk to the health of workers increases as conditions move further away from those generally 
      accepted as comfortable.  Risk of heat stress arises, for example, from working in high air 
      temperatures, exposure to high thermal radiation or high levels of humidity, such as those found 
      in foundries, glass works and laundries.  Cold stress may arise, for example, from working in 
      cold stores, food preparation areas and in the open during winter. 
       
      Assessments of the risk to worker’s health, from working in either a hot or cold environment, 
      needs to consider two sets of factors – personal and environmental.  Personal factors include 
      body activity, the amount and type of clothing, and duration of exposure.  Environmental factors 
      include ambient temperature, and radiant heat: and if the work is outside, sunlight, wind velocity 
      and the presence of rain or snow. 
       
      Lighting 
       
      Lighting should be sufficient to enable people to work and move about safely.  If necessary, local 
      lighting should be provided at individual workstations, and at places of particular risk.  Lighting 
      and light fittings should not create any hazard.  Automatic emergency lighting, powered by an 
      independent source, should be provided where sudden loss of light would create risk. 
                             
                            31 
       
