                                               Page 1 
       Born With: Teacher’s Guide 
       A novel study. 
        
       Introduction 
       Born With is a contemporary novel appropriate for grades seven and up. It is written in two 
       voices so the reader can see how two teens think differently when confronted with the same 
       situation. This guide is to encourage individual reading, literature circles or class novel 
       discussion. The guide will help increase awareness about those who are born with Down 
       syndrome, have ALS or different sexual orientations. It is also a novel that can promote 
       discussion about ALS, hate crimes, family life, and adolescent friendships. 
        
       Novel Summary: Born With 
       Meet Erika and Gianni! 
       Erika is a fifteen-year-old girl born with Down syndrome. She loves to sing and dance and hang 
       out with friends. Being in three dance numbers in the school production of Grease is a big job, 
       but with the help of her Best Buddy, Gianni, Erika knows she can be a star. 
       Gianni is a sixteen-year-old boy with a secret. Like his Best Buddy, Erika, who was born with 
       Down syndrome, Gianni loves to sing and dance. He also knows that he’s different from the 
       other boys in his school- but is he so different from that cool, attractive fellow actor in the school 
       play? Or is he just imagining that the sparks between them are mutual? 
       Told in the alternating voices of Erika and Gianni, Born With is the story of two teens who help 
       each other to find and accept their own best selves.  
        
       Discussion Questions: Prereading 
         1.  What is Down syndrome? What are some of the distinguishing features of Down 
          syndrome, both physically and intellectually? 
         2.  Can a child born with Down syndrome go to school? Learn how to read? What are some 
          jobs that people born with Down syndrome can do later on in life? 
         3.  Are there organizations that help those who are born with Down syndrome?   
