   Service Information Leaflet
   Young People’s Counselling Service
   Phone: 01352 704150
   Text: 80800 start your message YPCS - Texts are free
   email: ypcs@flintshire.gov.uk
   web: www.flintshire.gov.uk/help4yp
   This Service Information Leaflet provides a series of questions and answers
   about counselling and the Young People’s Counselling Service, Flintshire.
   If you require any further information, feel free to contact the counselling
   team directly.
   About Counselling
   What is counselling?
   Counselling gives young people a regular and confidential space to talk
   about worries or problems they are experiencing.  Talking things through
   in a confidential setting, with regular appointments over a period of time
   can often help young people gain new and different perspectives. This can
   lead to changes in how they feel about themselves, their relationships with
   others, their thinking and their behaviour - both in and out of school.
   How does counselling work?
   Having thoughts, feelings and worries listened to, clarified or understood
   by someone who is not directly involved in problems or concerns can be
   hugely beneficial.  Often, young people find that having a confidential
   setting  and  regular  time  to  talk  enables  them  to  build  a  trusting 
   relationship with which to understand themselves better or get further
   help in other places if they need it.  Counselling can also enable young
   people to see alternative choices for moving forwards.  Sometimes just
   ‘talking things through’ can help young people to feel clearer or more 
   confident about something they had in mind already.
                  2
      What does a counsellor do?
      YPCS Counsellors are trained to listen and understand young people; to
      see things from their perspective.  As well as listening, counsellors also
      help young people to clarify their problems or difficulties, see patterns in
      their  relating,  thinking  and/or  behaviour  and support them in making 
      positive changes if they wish.  Counsellors do not give advice or tell young
      people what to do - instead they help young people to make their own
      choices to facilitate personal growth and self-awareness.
      Who can come to counselling?
      The Young People’s Counselling Service is open to all young people in
      Flintshire,  Years  6-13,  Pupil  Referral  Units  (PRUs),  not  in  education,
      employment or training (NEETs), Specialist School, Travellers and educated
      other than at school (EOTAS).
      What kind of things might a young person talk to a counsellor about?
      The issues are wide and varied. Some of these include: 
      4anxiety                        4exam stress
      4bullying                       4family
      4behaviour                      4relationships
      4bereavement                    4self harm
      4depression                     4sexuality
      4divorce & separation           4substance misuse
                                      3
   Confidentiality
   Is counselling confidential?
   Yes, however there are exceptional circumstances when confidentiality
   needs to be broken.  This is clearly explained to the young person at the
   start of any counselling relationship. 
   Why is it so important that counselling sessions are kept confidential?
   In order for young people to feel completely safe and trust the counsellor
   to help them with their concerns, it is essential for confidentiality to be
   maintained.  Confidentiality also supports young people when they want
   to change their behaviour or be completely honest about some of the
   more difficult feelings in life, such as sadness, anxiety, fear, shame or
   anger.
   When would confidentiality be broken?
   Confidentiality will be broken if the counsellor deems a young person at
   significant risk of harm to either themselves or others during the course of
   counselling. In these cases, the Counsellor will speak to the designated
   Link Teacher in school and/or Child Protection Officer and agree the next
   steps, together with the young person (wherever possible). 
   This could mean a referral onto other external services such as Child and
   Adolescent  Team  (CAT),  informing  parents/carers  or  other  actions  to
   ensure the care and safety of the young person.
                  4
   Counsellors, along with other professionals continue to balance young
   people’s rights with the duty of child protection and to act in the best 
   interests of the young person.
   Do parents/carers or other adults need to be informed?
   If a young person has been assessed as *Gillick competent they have the
   legal  right  not  to  tell  parents,  carers  (or  even  other  adults  or  young 
   people) that they are accessing counselling, and this should be respected.
   Of course, young people themselves are free to tell whoever they wish
   that they are engaging in counselling, and often do. 
   During the first session with a young person, the Counsellor will always
   explain  the  boundaries  of  confidentiality,  check  that  they  are  fully 
   understood and in what circumstances confidentiality would need to be
   broken.
   Do Counsellors work with other services?
   Counsellors  work  closely  with  CAT  and  other  Children’s  Services  - 
   making referrals in conjunction with school staff where necessary - to
   ensure the safety of all young people who engage with the service.
     *Gillick competence is a term originating in England and is used in medical law to
     decide whether a child (16 years or younger) is able to consent to his or her own 
      medical treatment, without the need for parental permission or knowledge
                     5
       Appointments
       What should I do if I think a young person could benefit from counselling?
       If you believe a young person might benefit from talking to the school
       counsellor, you can:
       4find out who the counsellor is & when he/she is available in school and
          let the young person know
       4give the young person a YPCS FAQs leaflet, contact card or flyer
       4inform them how to make an initial appointment 
       4help the young person to make an appointment 
       4talk to the YPCS or the Link Teacher in school 
       Can I make an initial appointment on behalf of a young person?
       Yes, however, only if the young person requests this or agrees for you to
       do this on their behalf.  It is always a young person’s choice about whether
       to come to counselling and they should not be ‘sent’ to counselling for
       help or persuaded one way or another, even if school staff, parents/carers
       or other adults think they could benefit from talking to a counsellor.
       How can young people access the service?
       There are a number of ways young people may access the service:
       Tel:           01352 704150
       Text:          80800 (start message with YPCS) - Texts are FREE 
       Website:       www.flintshire.gov.uk/help4yp    
       Email:          ypcs@flintshire.gov.uk
       Drop-in:       drop-in to see the counsellor on the day(s) they are in school
                                             6
   When and where do appointments take place?
   Appointments  take  place  weekly,  in  or  out  of  school  in  a  private, 
   designated room.  It is helpful for sessions to take place in the same room
   each week to promote feelings of trust, safety and confidentiality.
   Can appointments be made outside of school hours and holidays?
   Yes.  Appointments can be made during school holidays at venues in and
   around Flintshire.
   What if a young person misses an appointment or is not in school?
   If a young person misses an appointment, they will be offered another
   appointment.  If  two  consecutive  appointments  are  missed  and  the 
   counsellor does not hear from the young person (or the Link Teacher on
   their behalf) he/she will assume that the young person no longer wishes
   to come to counselling.  The young person is free to return at any time in
   the future and this is clearly explained during the first session.
   What if a young person wants to stop coming to counselling?
   Young people are free to end counselling at any time.  During the first 
   session  they  are  advised  of  this  and  are  asked  to  let  the  counsellor, 
   counselling service or Link Teacher know if this is the case.
                  7
   Who is the ‘Link Teacher’ in school?
   The Link Teacher is a designated member of school staff who has agreed
   to take responsibility for and be the point of contact for school-based
   counselling.  The Counsellor and the Link Teacher also work together to
   ensure  smooth  running  of  the  appointments  system,  review  and 
   evaluation of the service and ongoing improvements where necessary.
   The Link Teacher also works with the Counsellor to raise awareness of the
   counselling service with young people, staff, parents and governors and
   also informs the Counsellor of any significant events that may impact on
   young  people’s  emotional  wellbeing.  For  example,  bereavements  or
   critical incidents, which can occur in the community or school. 
   About the counsellor
   What qualifications, experience and supervision does the counsellor have?
   All Counsellors hold a recognised, formal qualification in Counselling, such
   as a Diploma or a Degree, plus a range of appropriate experience and
   training to work with young people.  YPCS counsellors are also members
   of  the  British  Association  for  Counselling  and  Psychotherapy  (BACP),
   engage  in  regular  training  and  Continuing  Professional  Development
   (CPD)  and  work  with  BACP’s  Ethical  Framework  for  Good  Practice  in
   Counselling & Psychotherapy.
   In addition, Counsellors receive regular, ongoing Clinical Supervision.  This
   is  where  the  counsellor  meets  with    another  counsellor,  who  is  their
   Supervisor.    Counsellors  discuss  their  caseload  during  Supervision  and
   receive  support and guidance for their work with young people.
                  8
     And finally, what if. . .?
     What if I think a young person is only coming to counselling to get out of
     going to a lesson?
     YPCS Counsellors always vary appointment times each week to ensure
     that young people do not miss the same lessons. Where appropriate, they
     can also explore with the young person their concerns about going to the
     lesson, as sometimes underlying fears or issues maybe at the root. 
     The counselling relationship is a professional one and YPCS Counsellors
     continue to review whether counselling is effective or the best form of
     help.
     What  if  a  young  person  is  unhappy  with  the  counselling  they  are 
     receiving?
     Young people are advised of the complaints procedure during their first
     session and can talk to the Counsellor directly about how they feel or, they
     may prefer to contact the Counsellor’s Manager using the contact details
     outlined in this leaflet.  All young people are advised of this during the first
     session with the Counsellor.
     Further information
     For further information about counselling and to view a copy of the Ethical
     Framework  for  Good  Practice  in  Counselling  &  Psychotherapy,  go  to
     www.bacp.co.uk   or  contact  the  Young  People’s  Counselling  Service
     directly.
                                   9
   Feedback from young people
   “It helped me a lot in big situations”
   “It improves my behaviour and my confidence around people, where
   ever I go”
   “Really helped me to organise my thoughts and understand my feelings
   more”
   “I have found counselling helpful and it has been useful to let things out
   in the open, instead of keeping them inside”
   “It helped me get a bit more confidence and believe in myself a bit
   more”
   “Counselling helped me a lot by helping me to stop stressing so much
   and how to handle stress”
   “It was helpful to go to someone and tell someone everything that was
   happening knowing that no one else would know”
   “I got lots of confidence, got safety idea”
   “More able to explore and understand feelings which has helped to 
   control my temper”
   “Counselling helped me loads”
   “It helped me to deal with my worries and overcome them”
                  10
                                                                                        
                                                                                       1
                                                                                       7
                                                                                       8
                                                                                       0
                                                                                       0
                                                                                       /
                                                                                       6
                      This booklet is available in Welsh on request                    1
                                                                                       5
                                                                                       1
