  A BUYER’S GUIDE TO AP 
  INVOICE AUTOMATION 
  SOLUTIONS 
  The 6 step checklist to identify the right AP automation 
  solution for your organization.
                                            Contents
                                            Introduction          3
                                            Step 1: Define your scope       4
                                            Step 2: Map current AP process to identify your needs7 
                                            Step 3: Identify system dependencies                                                                                                                                                                                                    9                   
                                            Step 4: Capture IT requirements                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                            Step 5: Research, audit, and compare solutions      13   
                                            Step 6: Build your business case                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                            How Medius can help                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18
      Introduction           3
                Introduction
                If you can check at least one of these boxes, then this 
                buyer’s guide is for you:
                  I’m looking to introduce digital/automated 
                  invoice processing in our organization but unsure 
                  where to start.
                  I have some level of automation in place for AP 
                  but want to explore alternatives in the market to 
                  understand if we’re using the best option.
                  My manager asked me to research and present a 
                  few solutions that would suit our organization. 
                Just to be clear, this guide is not about selling you a solution. The 
                purpose is to offer you a checklist that will help you get started 
                researching, evaluating and ifnding the solution that is most 
                appropriate for your organization’s needs.
                It’s only six steps but at ifrst glance these can still seem 
                overwhelming when you’re just getting started. Don’t worry, 
                continue reading and we’ll walk you through it and provide tips 
                to consider for each step.
           Deifne your scope                                                                4
              01 Deifne your scope
                                 There is a really easy way to deifne your scope. 
                                 “I’m looking for a solution that will help accelerate 
                                 and automate our accounts payable process and 
                                 basically make my life in AP a bit easier.” Though 
                                 this is a good objective and achievable with several 
                                 modern AP invoice automation solutions, we advise 
                                 you to spend a bit more time and thought on this 
                                 ifrst step as it will help you deifne success of your 
                                 upcoming project.
                                 Just to set the scene, here’s a quick overview of what invoice 
                                 processing means so that you can determine which areas you are 
                                 looking to improve:
                                       Invoice                 Invoice                 Invoice  
                                     Recepiton                Worklfow                Payment
                                 Basically, invoice processing is not the same as e-invoicing, nor 
                                 supplier portals or complex procurement systems. These types 
                                 of solutions may help you work more efifciently in some ways, 
                                 but do not support the core of the accounts payable process. If 
                                 accounts payable is your top priority you should focus your efforts 
                                 on a solution that can handle these three steps:
                                   1.  Invoice reception: paper, pdf, xml… all data in one format
                                       How do you receive supplier invoices today? Paper in mail, 
                                       pdf via email and/or e-invoices? A good scanning and data 
                                       capture solution will do the job of consolidating all invoices
           Deifne your scope                                                                5
                                       regardless of format into standardized data to be 
                                       entered into your digital AP worklfow. This service can 
                                       be outsourced, purchased as part of the AP invoice 
                                       automation solution or as a stand-alone system. In the 
                                       latter case it is crucial that a solid connection between your 
                                       capture solution and all other systems is in place.
                                   2.  Invoice worklfow: accelerate processing by removing 
                                       manual tasks
                                       The actual processing of an invoice includes different 
                                       tasks depending on the type of invoice. Expense, or non-
                                       PO, invoices need to be coded, distributed and approved. 
                                       Invoices that refer to a purchase order (PO) need to be 
                                       connected to a PO, have data matched on line level 
                                       and any identiifed deviations distributed for review and 
                                       approval. With a modern AP invoice automation solution, 
                                       each of these tasks can be automated to a great extent. If 
                                       you’re considering relying solely on the existing worklfow 
                                       capabilities native to your ERP/ifnance system, be sure to 
                                       examine if it is suitable for delivering an effective solution 
                                       for truly touchless invoice processing. Be sure to factor in 
                                       the IT overhead and ongoing support for conifguring and 
                                       maintaining native worklfows in your business case, ROI 
                                       analysis and success metrics as discussed below. 
                                   3.  Supplier payment: secure and fast payments for better 
                                       supplier relationships
                                       Once the invoice has been processed and approved in the 
                                       AP worklfow, it will be posted in the ERP system for ifnal 
                                       booking and payment. 
                                       An modern AP automation solution will help you 
                                       accelerate invoice processing to enable faster payment 
                                       to your supplier. If you choose the path of an external 
                                       AP solution, the processing will happen outside of your 
                                       ERP, so it is critical that the solution you select has a 
                                       solid integration to the ERP to ensure information lfows 
                                       seamlessly and securely between the two systems.
                                 The project scope should be based on your organization’s needs 
                                 and challenges. The important thing to remember here is to 
                                 set clearly deifned objectives and to stay within the project 
                                 scope. One of the biggest pitfalls of an AP automation initiative 
                                 is adding sub-projects in related areas to the scope, such as 
                                 dynamic discounting, supplier portals, e-invoicing, etc. These can
           Deifne your scope                                                                6
                                 be considered as separate additional initiatives, but their success 
                                 relies on getting your AP house in order ifrst.
                                 Examples of speciifc and measurable project goals include:
                                 •  Reduce invoice processing lead time by X%
                                 •  Achieve Y% fully automated – touchless – processing of PO-
                                    based invoices
                                 •  Reduce hard costs generated by late vendor payments by Z
                   Aciton Points:
                   Identify key stakeholders within your organization.
                       Finance                 Information                Accounts 
                                               Technology                  Payable
                   Agree on the project scope and stick to the defined scope 
                   throughout the project.
                   Set specific and measurable goals that the project should 
                   achieve.
                     Map your current AP process                                                                                                                          7
                         02 Map the current AP 
                                                             process to identify 
                                                             your needs
                                                             The accounts payable process usually consists of 
                                                             two different worklfows, depending on the invoice 
                                                             type: processing expense invoices not related to a 
                                                             purchase order (PO) and processing direct spend 
                                                             invoices that will be matched against a purchase 
                                                             order and goods receipt note in the ERP and/or the 
                                                             procurement system. 
                                                             Start this step by identifying the proportion of PO vs non-PO 
                                                             invoices in your organization. Then, map out how you handle 
                                                             these worklfows today – how many people are involved, which 
                                                             steps are manual vs automated and what are the main pain 
                                                             points or bottlenecks in each process lfow? How do you currently 
                                                             archive your invoices after they are processed? Here’s a list of 
                                                             the most common challenges in each worklfow to help you get 
                                                             started.
                                                             Challenges in the direct spend (PO) invoices worklfow:
                                                             •    Matching invoice lines with corresponding data on purchase 
                                                                  orders and goods receipts notes when not all data is digital 
                                                                  and/or synced up in one system.
                                                             •    Managing deviating invoice data is a very time-consuming 
                                                                  task, requiring investigation with suppliers and buyers.
                                                             •    If an automatic matching process is in place, there is often still 
                                                                  a challenge when data doesn’t match up perfectly, prompting 
                                                                  a manual review of deviations.
                                                             •    Overly simplistic and/or inlfexible matching engines will not 
                                                                  support true, touchless processing, leading to more frequent 
                                                                  instances of manual intervention than expected.
                     Map your current AP process                                                                                                                          8
                                                             Challenges in the indirect spend (non-PO) invoices worklfow:
                                                             •    If there is no central inbox for vendor invoices, these will be 
                                                                  sent to different recipients in various formats and are at risk 
                                                                  of getting stuck in personal inboxes or on desks in disperse 
                                                                  locations before being entered into the AP process.
                                                             •    Manual handling and numerous people involved in the AP 
                                                                  process increase the risk of human errors in the coding, 
                                                                  approval and payment of an invoice.
                                                             •    Old-fashioned and clunky systems delay the AP process and 
                                                                  increase the risk of late - or worse - no payments to vendors.
                                                             •    Without a solution in place it is nearly impossible to have 
                                                                  insight into the status of an invoice, invoices close to due date, 
                                                                  actual spend and invoices that needs to be accrued for.
                                                             Once you have your list of the main pain points you wish to 
                                                             remove by implementing or replacing an AP automation 
                                                             solution, you will have a pretty good understanding of what 
                                                             key features you should be looking for when vetting different 
                                                             suppliers and solutions.
                                   Aciton Points:
                                   Identify the top 3-5 pain points within your invoice 
                                   management process (PO invoices and non-PO invoices).
                                Pain #1.                    Manual deviation                            Pain #4. 
                                                                management
                                Pain #2.                                                                Pain #5. 
                                Pain #3.
                                   Describe the goal scenario – a perfect process – and what 
                                   currently prevents you from getting there.
           Identify system dependencies                                                    9
              03 Identify system 
                                 dependencies
                                 The Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system or 
                                 ifnancial system is the most important dependency 
                                 when considering a new AP automation solution. It 
                                 is crucial that your new AP solution has a powerful, 
                                 stable and seamless connection to the ERP to 
                                 ensure effortless synchronization of your master data 
                                 – from general ledger accounts and payment terms 
                                 to purchase orders and tax codes. 
                                 When a complete synchronization has been set up, invoice, 
                                 procurement and accounting data can be exchanged seamlessly 
                                 between the business systems to facilitate matching of invoice 
                                 data with purchase orders, goods receipts and contracts at line 
                                 level detail. For your AP department, this means accurate and 
                                 efifcient invoice processing with the highest level of automation.
                   Aciton Points:
                   Identify which ERP system(s) your organization use, 
                   basically systems where you keep you accounts payable 
                   ledger(s) as well as systems where you process purchase 
                   orders.
                   Research internally if there are any plans to change or 
                   upgrade the ERP*
             * Changes in the ERP system does not need to delay the AP automaiton project, but it is import-
             ant for you to be aware of any plans so that you can include this as part of the requirements you 
             ask of your potenital AP automaiton vendors to ensure you select a future-proof soluiton.
           Identify system dependencies                                                    10
                   Aciton Points (cont.):
                   Vet the AP automation solutions that you are researching 
                   to ensure they have a strong and stable connection to your 
                   ERP. If you use several different ERPs it is crucial that the 
                   solution can handle a multi-ERP environment.
                   Identify other business systems in use that will affect the 
                   AP automation project
           Capture IT requirements                                                         11
              04 Capture IT 
                                 requirements
                                 Many companies looking to automate their accounts 
                                 payable process encounter a challenge when it 
                                 comes to integrating a system with their existing IT 
                                 infrastructure, including the ERP in use. If you select 
                                 to install an on-premise solution - hosted on your 
                                 own servers and requiring numerous customizations 
                                 - implementing a new system will quickly become a 
                                 complex, time-consuming and costly IT project.  
                                 Good news: there is another way. Today, there are many AP 
                                 automation solutions available as a standard cloud service. A 
                                 standardized application means you have access to the full 
                                 functionality that can be conifgured to your business needs 
                                 and processes in a smooth and speedy deployment project. 
                                 Business administrators (rather than IT resources) are responsible 
                                 for ongoing conifguration updates as they know how your 
                                 organization transacts business with suppliers and how those 
                                 suppliers bill you. 
                                 Another beneift of a cloud solution is that product upgrades are 
                                 made available automatically on a regular basis so there is no 
                                 need to engage the IT team or bring in external consultants for 
                                 upgrade projects.
                                     “We have reached a higher level of professionalism both 
                                     in the processing of invoices and the accounts payable 
                                     process, but also due to the fact that we operate in the 
                                     cloud and do not need to worry about servers, security 
                                     and availability. We always have the most modern 
                                     version without having to worry about upgrades and 
                                     upgrade projects.”
                                     Per Magnus Frantzen, CFO at Bohus AS
           Capture IT requirements                                                         12
                   Aciton Points:
                   Involve your IT team to ensure they can support the project 
                   with the resources needed. 
                   Decide on a cloud or on-premise solution.
                   Ask your IT team for any specific requirements related to 
                   system security, hosting and maintenance.
           Research, audit & compare solutions                                             13
              05 Research, audit and 
                                 compare solutions
                                 Now that you have a pretty good understanding of 
                                 what type of solution you need and the challenges 
                                 you wish to solve, it’s time you start looking for the 
                                 solution that best matches your identiifed needs. 
                                 There is a reason that this step is at the end of the 
                                 list: if you start researching solutions before you have 
                                 a clear view of your needs, you may be seduced by 
                                 something that looks amazing on a fancy website or 
                                 glossy marketing brochure but, in reality, doesn’t do 
                                 the job you need.
                                 Just like when you are planning to buy a new car or book your 
                                 next holiday trip, make sure you do thorough research using 
                                 different information channels:
                                 •  Start with Google to identify potential candidate solutions, 
                                    browse and bookmark their website. 
                                 •  Head to LinkedIn to participate in discussions in relevant 
                                    groups, ask group members for their experiences when 
                                    selecting and implementing a new AP automation solution. 
                                 •  Ask your peers or friends in similar positions and/or companies 
                                    for feedback and recommendations on the solution they use.
                                     “The fact that we selected a cloud solution and that 
                                     we were able to implement so quickly enabled us to 
                                     get a very strong ROI with break-even in less than a 
                                     year, which is very hard to say with most software 
                                     implementations.”
                                     Maulik Patel, Senior Manager IT Finance Applicaitons at 
                                     Marc Jacobs
           Research, audit & compare solutions                                             14
                   Aciton Points:
                   Research vendor websites and give them a call to inquire 
                   about their solution, features and services.
                   Ask the vendors forcase studie              s or reference customers 
                   that they have helped solve AP challenges similar to yours.
                   Put the requirements list you have compiled through steps 
                   1-4 in this guide into a spreadsheet and evaluate how well 
                   each solution can match each requirement.
                   Ask for a live demo of the solution to see it in 
                   action and ensure the solution lives up to what the 
                   sales representative has promised you during initial 
                   presentations.
                                                      Company A              Company B
            Subject matter         ✔                      ✔                       ✘
            experitse
            Plug & play 
            integraiton            ✔                      ✘                       ✔
            User -                 ✔
            friendliness                                  ✔                       ✘
            Best-in-class 
            client KPIs            ✔                       ✘                      ✘
            Advanced               ✔                       ✘                      ✘
            matching
            Build your business case                                                           15
              06 Build your business 
                                  case
                                  If you have completed the previous steps of this 
                                  buyer’s guide, then you have already done the 
                                  majority of the research and data collection needed 
                                  to build a business case. Now it’s time to summarize 
                                  your ifndings and make sure you present the 
                                  relevant information to the right stakeholders and 
                                  decision makers.
                                  How to sell to your IT stakeholders 
                                  Your IT stakeholders will need to know what impact the 
                                  new solution will have on their organization both in terms 
                                  of implementation, including integration to existing IT 
                                  infrastructure, and ongoing maintenance. So, in order to gain IT’s 
                                  approval, they will need to know:
                                  •  What resources will be required from the IT team during 
                                     implementation?
                                  •  Will the solution require ongoing support from IT in terms of 
                                     maintenance and regular upgrades?
                                  •  How will the solution support future changes in business or IT 
                                     infrastructure?
                                  As discussed in step 4, if you select a cloud-based solution you 
                                  will be able to tick many of the IT team’s checkboxes since this 
                                  will offer you an easy integration, no internal maintenance and 
                                  automatic product upgrades. In fact, you will likely be helping 
                                  your IT manager free up time for core business projects by 
                                  replacing old, on-premise solutions with a cloud service.
                                  How to sell to your Finance stakeholders 
                                  For your Finance stakeholders, it’s obviously going to be mostly 
                                  about doing the math and making sure you can present a rapid 
                                  and credible ROI. Finance mangers also want to be reassured
            Build your business case                                                           16
                                  that this is a going to be a low risk project, so building trust 
                                  and presenting a solution with a proven track record is very 
                                  important. 
                                  You can count on the fact that a modern AP automation solution 
                                  will help deliver improved visibility into spend and more accurate 
                                  cash lfow and accrual reporting. And this, for sure, is something 
                                  that will put a smile on any CFO’s face.
                                  Do the math - ROI
                                  When it comes to the ROI calculations there are a few data points 
                                  you need to collect:
                                    1.  Solution cost: it is crucial that you have the full and 
                                         detailed picture to calculate the total cost of ownership. 
                                         Ask your vendor:
                                            •   Will you pay a license cost or monthly subscription? 
                                                What is this cost based on – number of invoices, 
                                                users or something else?
                                            •   What will be the cost for product upgrades in the 
                                                next few years?
                                            •   What is the implementation cost and how much 
                                                support will be required from your internal IT staff 
                                                during implementation?
                                            •   What cost should you expect for ongoing support 
                                                and maintenance?
                                    2.  Hard savings, such as:
                                             •  Headcount reduction and/or scaling existing 
                                                organization to manage larger responsibilities. 
                                             •  Avoided late payment fees, lost or duplicate 
                                                payments and savings from early payment 
                                                discounts.
                                             •  Reduce the cost of handling paper invoices 
                                                (scanning, mailing, archiving).
                                             •  Removal of internal resources from maintenance of 
                                                old systems.
                                    3.  Soft savings, such as:
                                            •   Time savings across the organization (i.e. budget 
                                                holders doing clerical work and AP staff dealing with 
                                                vendor escalations).
                                            •   Freeing up resources in AP for more value adding 
                                                tasks.
            Build your business case                                                           17
                                            •   Improved insights into AP process bringing timely 
                                                and more accurate support for ifnancial forecasting, 
                                                cash lfow and accrual reporting. 
                                            •   Improved vendor relationships. 
                                            •   Better organizational lfexibility in case of business 
                                                changes such as mergers, acquisitions and 
                                                international expansions.  
                                  Ask your vendor to help you gather and benchmark all these 
                                  numbers and put everything into a spreadsheet to present to 
                                  your internal stakeholders.
                                       “We now have full visibility and control of our invoices 
                                       and ifnancials with the new automated worklfow 
                                       process. We can report on-time and with complete 
                                       accuracy. The business can easily manage its approval 
                                       responsibilities and quickly answer their own budget 
                                       review questions.”
                                       Elise Byrd, AP Manager at Silver Eagle Distributors
                    Aciton Points:
                    Ask your preferred solution provider for case studies or 
                    reference calls with companies similar to yours, who are 
                    already using the solution to build trust with your key 
                    stakeholders.
                    Collect the numbers and data points you need to build a 
                    solid ROI calculation – ask the solution provider to help out 
                    with calculations and relevant benchmarks.
                     How MediusFlow can help                                                                                                                              18
                                                             How MediusFlow 
                                                             can help
                                            While vetting the different alternatives on the market for 
                                            AP invoice automation solutions, you should consider 
                                            MediusFlow – the trusted solution of more than 2,000 
                                            companies across the globe. 
                                            Here’s what MediusFlow offers to support your next AP automation 
                                            initiative:
                                            •     A fully digital and efifcient worklfow for your indirect spend invoices, 
                                                  thanks to automation functionality and a user-friendly mobile solution 
                                                  for invoice approvers.
                                            •     Record high touchless ratio for your direct spend invoices being 
                                                  matched to a purchase order in a fully automated process without any 
                                                  user intervention.
                                            •     Speed to value with a fast and fully cloud-based deployment and 
                                                  standardized integration packages to leading ERP systems.
                                            •     Full visibility of your AP process with powerful performance dashboards 
                                                  and unique benchmarking capabilities for continuous improvement of 
                                                  process efifciency.
                                   Aciton Points:
                                   Visit mediusflow.com to learn more about the solution.
                                   Check out whaMt ediusFlow customers sa about they                                                                                    
                                   solution.
                                   Book a personal demo with one of our automation experts.
