                                                                                                                               
                                 
                                
                                
                                
          St John’s Institute of Dermatology 
           
          Scratch monitoring  
           
          This leaflet explains how to monitor your scratching behaviour (which is different to the 
          sensation of an itch). This is the first of two leaflets that offer support on how to reduce 
          habitual scratching. The second leaflet is called ‘Habit reversal to reduce scratching 
          and promote skin healing’, please ask for a copy if you have not already. 
           
          If you have any further questions, please speak to the doctor, nurse or psychologist 
          caring for you. 
           
          What is scratch monitoring? 
          Scratch monitoring is the recording of your usual scratching behaviour. This includes all 
          situations and activities associated with scratching and how often scratching occurs.  
           
          Why should I monitor my scratching? 
          This is to help you to become more aware of habitual (regular) and unconscious scratching, 
          and to identify when and where you scratch most often. 
           
          How to carry out scratch monitoring 
          Scratching on your skin might include using your nails, rubbing with hands, using clothes/the 
          edge of objects, or someone else scratching you.  
           
          Scratch monitoring occurs for one week. Do not avoid scratching during this period.  
          To carry out your scratch monitoring, please follow these simple steps:  
           
              •   Click on the hand-held tally counter every time you scratch, touch, rub or pick your skin.  
              •   One scratching episode equals one click. If you use both hands to scratch, click twice.  
              •   At the end of each day enter the day/ date and the total number of scratches for that day 
                  in the table on the next page, and then set the counter back to zero for the next day.  
              •   Continue to follow your skin care plan. 
               
          For further advice, please speak to the doctor, nurse or psychologist caring for you in the 
          dermatology department. 
           
           
          1 of 3                                                                                                                  
          
         Scratch monitoring record 
         For one week, record the total number of scratches each day in the table below: 
                                                                
           Day/ Date                                                                                           
                                                                                      
           Total number                                                                                   
           of scratches          
                                 
          
         During this week of scratch monitoring, keep a note of the situations in which you scratch the 
         most (e.g. when watching TV, returning home, or after a shower). Use the box below to do this: 
          
           The situations I scratch in the most are: 
            
            
            
                                                                                                                     
            
         Staying committed to scratch monitoring 
            
         Some people are worried, shocked, or amazed about finding out how much they scratch. This is 
            
         natural. The suggestions below might help you stay committed to scratch monitoring: 
            
            
         •   You can choose whether or not to disclose your scratch monitoring, but you might consider 
             telling a friend or family member. You can ask them to remind you to“ click” instead of them 
             saying  “stop scrtcahing”.  This may help motivate you to sick tt o your goal of scratch 
             monitoring. 
         •   If you prefer not to disclose in much detail, you might briefly explain, then change the topic of 
             conversation. 
          
         What happens at the end of scratch monitoring? 
         After  you have completeyd our  scratch monitoring for one week, discuss your scratch 
         monitoring record with your doctor, nurse or psychologist. You will then be ready to learn how to 
         reduce your scratching using a technique called habit reversal - this is explained in the second 
         leaflet  ‘Habit reversal to reduce scratching and promote skin he. aPlilngeas’ e ask a 
         member of staff for a copy. 
          
         Useful sources of information 
         Atopic Skin Disease  
         This website provides information about habit reversal and topical treatments. 
         w: www.atopicskindisease.com 
          
         The National Eczema Society  
         This organisation is an excellent source of information for people with eczema.  
         w: www.eczema.org 
          
         The British Association of Dermatologists  
         This organisation provides information on various skin conditions, self-help materials and 
         support services. 
         w: www.skinsupport.org.uk 
         2 of 3 
          
           Contact us 
           If you have any questions or concerns about scratch monitoring, please speak to the 
           doctor, nurse or psychologist caring for you.  
            
           Out of hours, please contact your GP or NHS 111. 
            
           For more information leaflets on conditions, procedures, treatments and services 
           offered at our hospitals, please visit www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/leaflets  
                                                                                                            
         Pharmacy Medicines Helpline 
         If you have any questions or concerns about your medicines, please speak to the staff caring for 
         you or call our helpline. 
         t: 020 7188 8748 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday 
          
         Your comments and concerns 
         For advice, support or to raise a concern, contact our Patient Advice and Liaison Service 
         (PALS). To make a complaint, contact the complaints department. 
         t: 020 7188 8801 (PALS)             e: pals@gstt.nhs.uk 
           020 7188 3514 (complaints)           complaints2@gstt.nhs.uk 
         t:                                  e:
          
                                                            
         Language and accessible support services 
         If you need an interpreter or information about your care in a different language or 
         format, please get in touch:  
         t: 020 7188 8815      e: languagesupport@gstt.nhs.uk 
          
         NHS 111  
         Offers medical help and advice from fully trained advisers supported by experienced nurses 
         and paramedics. Available over the phone 24 hours a day. 
         t: 111 
          
         NHS Choices  
         Provides online information and guidance on all aspects of health and healthcare, to help 
         you make choices about your health. 
         w: www.nhs.uk 
          
         Get involved and have your say: become a member of the Trust 
         Members of Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust contribute to the organisation on a 
         voluntary basis. We count on them for feedback, local knowledge and support. Membership is 
         free and it is up to you how much you get involved. To find out more, and to become a member:  
         t: 0800 731 0319      e: members@gstt.nhs.uk  w: www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/membership 
          
          
          
          
          
                                                                                    Leaflet number: 4438/VER1 
                                                                                         Date published: July 2017 
                                                                                            Review date: July 2020 
                                                                    © 2017 Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust 
         3 of 3 
