    
                               
         www.umanitoba.ca/student/academiclearning 
         
                      Writing an Academic Paper 
        Listed below are the steps required to write an academic paper. These steps do not have to be done in 
        the order listed; in fact, they may be repeated many times during the process. Repeating steps most often 
        happens during the research, reading, and first draft stage of writing. Writing and learning is a fluid 
        process, so a thesis statement or viewpoints in the paper might change as you do your research. Or, an 
        outline might be more easily written after completing the first draft rather than before. In addition, it is 
        not unusual to go back to do further research or to revise a thesis statement when editing the rough 
        draft. 
            
        Select a Topic 
              choose, if possible, a topic that interests you  
              follow directions given by your professor  
              consult with the TA or professor if you are uncertain about the assignment 
            
        Create a time schedule with deadlines for each step 
                   research  
                   read & take notes  
                   outline/organize information  
                   write the first draft  
                   revise for completeness, conciseness & clarity  
                   edit & proofread 
            
        Find sources 
              remember that one source can lead to other useful information  
              gather several different viewpoints to appreciate the topic’s complexity  
              search the BISON catalogue for books, journals and other material in the UM Libraries’ 
            collections and search NETDOC databases for journal citations, full-text resources, abstracts  
              make a complete reference notecard for each source 
            
                       
                     You have the tools. We’ll help you use them. 
        Prepare preliminary questions to guide your reading & note-taking 
              what information is needed to develop the topic?  
              what are the important issues related to this subject?  
              who has contributed significantly to this area?  
              what conclusions can be drawn? 
            
        Formulate a working thesis statement 
           A thesis statement is a declarative sentence that expands your topic into a scholarly proposal, 
           one that you will prove, defend, or expand on in your paper. 
            
        Design a system to organize and take notes 
                   Identify topic headings on each note card or loose leaf.  
                   indicate whether the information is a quote, a paraphrase, or a summary of the 
                   source  
                   add your original thoughts about the reading  
                   on all cards or pages, identify title, author, and page reference in an abbreviated 
                   form 
         
        Outline your paper 
                   list, classify, group, and number all discussion points 
                   Write your rough draft 
                   write sections of the paper, following your outline  
                   craft an introduction which includes the thesis statement and sufficient 
                   background information  
                   write a brief conclusion 
         
        Develop your thesis statement to: 
                   fit at the beginning or end of the introductory paragraph  
                   anticipate your conclusion and set in motion the presentation of supporting 
                   points  
                   control, focus, or direct the entire paper  
                   plainly state your position for the reader 
                                           Academic Learning Centre  2 
                           Revise 
                                           set the paper aside for a few days  
                                           read the paper aloud to detect any weaknesses in reasoning and structure  
                                           add or delete content to strengthen arguments and make connections  
                                           make certain everything in the paper relates back to your thesis statement  
                                           have someone read and comment on your paper 
                            
                           Edit 
                                        content & organization 
                                                  does each paragraph have one main idea expressed in a topic sentence?  
                                                  do succeeding paragraph sentences relate to their topic sentence?  
                                                  does sentence structure vary?  
                                                  have irrelevant or repeated words or phrases been deleted?  
                                                  is word choice precise, vivid, varied? 
                                        grammar 
                                                  are appropriate verb tenses used?  
                                                  are there any contractions e.g. ‘don’t’ or ‘can’t’? If so, rewrite in full ‘do not’ or cannot.  
                                                  have you run a spell-check? Have you searched for homonyms (their/there)?  
                                                  are prepositions and modifiers in the correct places? 
                            
                           Check documentation according to your particular discipline 
                                                    ask your professor which style should be used for your paper, for example, typically:  
                                                           o      humanities subjects use either MLA or the Chicago/Turabian (footnote) styles  
                                                           o      social-science subjects use APA style  
                                                           o      science subjects use CBE style 
                                                     study a style manual for the appropriate system you will use 
                            
                                                                                                                                                        Academic Learning Centre  3 
