                      Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
           Try to pick a                  RULES OF THUMB FOR WRITING 
           catchy title! 
                                                                                               1 
                                                    RESEARCH ARTICLES
                       
                                                                        A                     B
                                                    Tomislav Hengl , Michael Gould  
                              A
                               International Institute of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation (ITC), P.O. Box 6, 7500 
                                                    AA Enschede, Netherlands, hengl@itc.nl 
                                  BMichael Gould Associates, Apeldoornseweg 21, 6814 BG Arnhem, Netherlands 
                                                        mike.gould@mgassoc.demon.nl 
                                                   Web: http://www.itc.nl/personal/hengl/RT/  
                                                                            
                       
                       
                                                                     Abstract 
                       
                             The paper provides 'rules of thumb' for writing research articles (RA) and 
                                                                                                                           abstract should 
                             getting them published. These were discussed during the "Scientific writing 
                             course" organized for ITC PhD students by Cressie Communication Services.  be short but 
                                                                                                                           give the overall 
                             Important aspects of macro and sub-structure of a paper were selected 
                                                                                                                           idea: 
                             through group discussions. The substructure and functions of different 
                                                                                                                           what was done, 
                             sections of RAs are described. Results of previous investigations and 
                                                                                                                           what was found 
                                                                                                                           and what are the 
                             interviews among journal editors were used to summarize what makes a good 
                             RA. It was concluded that clear, logical, coherent, focused, good argument and main conclusions
                             well-structured writing gets the paper published and read. Some important 
                             rules of the thumb selected were: “Adjust your writing to the audience and 
                             purpose”, “Avoid redundancy and unnecessary explanations” and “Write like 
                             you speak and then revise”. 
                                                                                                    when selecting KWs, 
                            Keywords: Research article, rules of thumb, structure, publishing.      imagine you are 
                                                                                               
                                                                                                    searching for your 
                                                                                                    article in some 
                                                                                                    database 
                                                              I. INTRODUCTION 
                      A scientific or research article or paper is a technical (or essayistic?) document that 
                      describes a significant experimental, theoretical or observational extension of current 
                      knowledge, or advances in the practical application of known principles (O'Conner and 
                      Woodford, 1976). It is important to emphasize that a research article (further referred as 
      MOVE 1:         RA) should report on research findings that are not only sound (valid) and previously 
      Introduce  unpublished (original), but also add some new understanding, observation, proofs, i.e. 
      the topic       potentially important information (Gordon, 1983). Unlike a novel, newspaper article or 
                      an essay, a RA has a required structure and style, which is by international consensus 
      and             known as "Introduction Methods Results and Discussion" or IMRaD. However, a RA is 
      emphasize       not only a technically rigid document, but also a subjective intellectual product that 
      why is it       unavoidably reflects personal opinions and beliefs. Therefore, it requires good skills in 
      important! 
                      both structuring and phrasing the discoveries and thoughts. These skills are acquired 
                      through experience, but can also be taught.  
                       
     MOVE 2:          Many books have been written on general guidelines and rules to help scientists write 
     Relate to        RAs (Day, 1994; Trelease, 1958). These days, many scientific societies and groups 
     current          write quite detailed publications and style manuals to help both authors and publishers 
     knowledge:  to get along; see for example the CBE's style manual (1994) or the ACA-CSA-SSSA's 
                                                                                 
                      1
                       You are free to distribute this document, or use it in class, as long as you give credit to the source and you don't use it for any 
                      commercial purposes. In Enschede, September 2002. 
                                                                         1 
