                      Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
           Try to pick a                  RULES OF THUMB FOR WRITING 
           catchy title! 
                                                                                               1 
                                                    RESEARCH ARTICLES
                       
                                                                        A                     B
                                                    Tomislav Hengl , Michael Gould  
                              A
                               International Institute of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation (ITC), P.O. Box 6, 7500 
                                                    AA Enschede, Netherlands, hengl@itc.nl 
                                  BMichael Gould Associates, Apeldoornseweg 21, 6814 BG Arnhem, Netherlands 
                                                        mike.gould@mgassoc.demon.nl 
                                                   Web: http://www.itc.nl/personal/hengl/RT/  
                                                                            
                       
                       
                                                                     Abstract 
                       
                             The paper provides 'rules of thumb' for writing research articles (RA) and 
                                                                                                                           abstract should 
                             getting them published. These were discussed during the "Scientific writing 
                             course" organized for ITC PhD students by Cressie Communication Services.  be short but 
                                                                                                                           give the overall 
                             Important aspects of macro and sub-structure of a paper were selected 
                                                                                                                           idea: 
                             through group discussions. The substructure and functions of different 
                                                                                                                           what was done, 
                             sections of RAs are described. Results of previous investigations and 
                                                                                                                           what was found 
                                                                                                                           and what are the 
                             interviews among journal editors were used to summarize what makes a good 
                             RA. It was concluded that clear, logical, coherent, focused, good argument and main conclusions
                             well-structured writing gets the paper published and read. Some important 
                             rules of the thumb selected were: “Adjust your writing to the audience and 
                             purpose”, “Avoid redundancy and unnecessary explanations” and “Write like 
                             you speak and then revise”. 
                                                                                                    when selecting KWs, 
                            Keywords: Research article, rules of thumb, structure, publishing.      imagine you are 
                                                                                               
                                                                                                    searching for your 
                                                                                                    article in some 
                                                                                                    database 
                                                              I. INTRODUCTION 
                      A scientific or research article or paper is a technical (or essayistic?) document that 
                      describes a significant experimental, theoretical or observational extension of current 
                      knowledge, or advances in the practical application of known principles (O'Conner and 
                      Woodford, 1976). It is important to emphasize that a research article (further referred as 
      MOVE 1:         RA) should report on research findings that are not only sound (valid) and previously 
      Introduce  unpublished (original), but also add some new understanding, observation, proofs, i.e. 
      the topic       potentially important information (Gordon, 1983). Unlike a novel, newspaper article or 
                      an essay, a RA has a required structure and style, which is by international consensus 
      and             known as "Introduction Methods Results and Discussion" or IMRaD. However, a RA is 
      emphasize       not only a technically rigid document, but also a subjective intellectual product that 
      why is it       unavoidably reflects personal opinions and beliefs. Therefore, it requires good skills in 
      important! 
                      both structuring and phrasing the discoveries and thoughts. These skills are acquired 
                      through experience, but can also be taught.  
                       
     MOVE 2:          Many books have been written on general guidelines and rules to help scientists write 
     Relate to        RAs (Day, 1994; Trelease, 1958). These days, many scientific societies and groups 
     current          write quite detailed publications and style manuals to help both authors and publishers 
     knowledge:  to get along; see for example the CBE's style manual (1994) or the ACA-CSA-SSSA's 
                                                                                 
                      1
                       You are free to distribute this document, or use it in class, as long as you give credit to the source and you don't use it for any 
                      commercial purposes. In Enschede, September 2002. 
                                                                         1 
                   Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                   manual (1998). What used to be short guides for writing a RA has been extended to the 
                   level of meso and micro-elements of the paper. Various authors have investigated the 
    "What's been  principles of creating a good title (Ackles, 1996), writing a good abstract or introduction 
    done" and      (McPhee, 2001; Swales, 1981). Some go to the level of the micro-structure of RA Bring the 
                   (sentences) and provide a framework for a logical structure between the words (Gopen 
    "What need's                                                                                                GAP  
    to be done?"   and Swan, 1990; Kirman, 1992). However, writing a RA is still a "monkey-puzzle tree", 
                   especially if you are a non-native English speaker (further referred to as L2). What 
                   makes a good paper and which rules of thumb are the most important for these 
                   researchers?  
    MOVE 3:         
    Introduce      Following this question, we tried to formulate some rule of thumbs for easier writing (or 
                                                                                                                Objective 
    your work      better to say publishing) of RAs. These rules gathered from discussions during the 
    Give the       "Scientific writing for non-native English speakers" course, but also come from our 
    purpose and  personal experiences with scientific writing. The main idea was to summarize main 
    main           conclusions from these discussions and bring them all together in a form of a paper.  
    objective       
                    
                                                     II. METHODOLOGY 
                   The Scientific writing course, organized annually for ITC PhD students, was held in 
                                         th               th
                   period from March 8 until April 26 2002. There were nine students, who followed 
                   five full-day classes. This gave enough time to do numerous home-works and 
                                                                                                               Object of 
    Describe       assignments. The classes were organised in a way that participants worked in groups or 
    Experimental                                                                                               the study 
                   individually and discussed the most important issues, first among themselves and then 
    set-up         as a whole group. The following topics were discussed in more detail (in chronological 
                   order): standard structure or elements of an RA, macro, meso and micro levels of a RA, 
                   general problems with readability and communication, functions and content of 
                   Introduction, Methods, Results and Discussion section, writing successful abstracts and 
                   principles of submitting and publishing a RA. The participants were from eight 
                                                                                                               Establish 
                   countries (L2) and four continents, which was a ground for discussion of cultural-
                                                                                                               an author's 
                   academic differences (Prince et al., 1999). The working material and facilities were 
                                                                                                               'voice' 
                   organized by Ian Cressie (Cressie, 2002), while most of the classes were lead by 
    Explain used  Michael Gould, documentation consultant and advisory editor. Participants generated 
    techniques     some graphs and flow diagrams manually (Fig. 1), which we then modified and 
                   transferred to a manuscript form.  
                    
                                                                                      
                         Fig. 1. Photo from the Scientific writing class at ITC. Discussion about the "Discussion" section. 
                                                               2 
                       Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                       The basic concept of the course is that the students should learn from the real examples 
                       and on their own mistakes. In most of the cases, participants were analysing and 
                       correcting each-others work. In other cases, participants were making comments on 
                       examples prepared by Ian Cressie. Typical exercise was, for example: a short RA is 
                       given to students who have to write a missing abstract respecting the rules and functions 
                       of an abstract. 
                                                                                                                                           RA is like a 
                                                                                                                                           cook-book! 
                       Most of the rules mentioned in this article were agreed by the majority of participants. 
                                                                                                                                           Be specific 
                       We have also used results of previous investigations and inquiries of journal editors to 
                                                                                                                                           and provide 
                       support general conclusions. Nevertheless, some of the statements and principles reflect 
                                                                                                                                           all 
                       personal views and opinions and should not be confused with the cited literature. The 
                                                                                                                                           necessary 
                       listed rules and tips given here apply primarily to application-based sciences and RAs 
                       intended for publication in such journals.                                                                          detail 
                        
                        
                                                                       III. RESULTS 
                       RA structure and style 
                       A RA was first divided in number of article sections (futher reffered to as RAS) and 
       Give            elements (RAE). Participants agreed that the main article sections that are inevitable in 
       summary  any modern journal are, in this order: Title, Authors, Abstract, Introduction (I), 
       results         Methodology (M), Results (R), Conclusions and Discussion (D) and References. These 
                       are the core body of RA. Additional listed RAS's were: Author-paper documentation, 
                       Keywords, Acknowledgements, Abbreviations and Appendices. The RAEs listed were: 
                       tables, figures (graphs, maps, diagrams, sketches etc.), equations, citations and footnotes 
                       and comments. The RAEs can come in different places in the RA, however tables and 
                       figures are more usual in Results section and equations and citations in Methodology 
                       and Introduction. All these RAS's and RAEs have their function and required style and 
                       should form a coherent unity. The functions of main RAS's and discussed rules of 
                       thumb are given in Table 2.  
                        
                       Participants agreed that some RA, even with good data and interesting results, will be 
                                                                                                                                           Focus:
                       rejected if the style and format of the paper are not tailored for the audience. This agrees 
                                                                                                                                           put more 
                       with the results of investigations among 116 editors (Gosden, 1992; Fig. 1), who 
       Compare  identified following most frequent causes to reject an L2 author: unclear text, incoherent  focus on 
       results                                                                                                                             what 
                       development of the topic in paragraphs and incorrect use of grammar. In addition, the 
                                                                                                                                           should be
                                                                                                                                                         
                       participants analysed an exemplary flawed paper by unknown author and decided to 
                                                                                                                                           emphasized 
                       reject it after some discussion. The list of reasons for rejection can be seen in Table 1. 
                        
                               Table 1. Most important reasons for rejection of a RA.  
                                    Aspect  Reason for rejection 
                                     Topic  irrelevant topic or topic of local interest only 
                                  Newness  papers offers nothing new 
                                     Focus  topic, objectives and conclusions are not connected  
                           Methodological  unclear and misleading argumentation; 
                                      steps   weak methodology or results 
                                      Style   unclear, unfocused and incoherent text 
                              Data Quality    flawed design; insignificant sample number; preliminary findings only 
                        
                        
                                                                               3 
                                    Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                                                Table 2. Research Article Sections (RAS), main functions, preferred style and related rules of thumb.  
                                      RAS                         Main functions                                   Preferred style                              Rules of thumb 
                                      Title                       - indicates     content and m       ain          - short and simple (7-10                     - avoid complex grammar; 
                                                                  discoveries;                                     words);                                      - make it catchy       ! 
                                                                  - attracts    the reader's     attention;        - purpos ive (aim s at specific              - avoid redundancy           ("An 
                                                                                                                   audience);                                   investigation of... ", "The analy            sis 
                                                                                                                                                                of... ", "Effect of... ", "Influence 
                                                                                                                                                                of...", "New m       ethod...); 
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                      Abstract                    - reflects the main '       story' of the        - past (perfect) tense and                   - avoid introducing the topic; 
                                                                  RA;                                              passive voice(!)                             - explain: what was done, what 
                                                                  - calls attention but avoids                     - short and concise                          was found and what are the main 
                                                                  extra explanations        ;                      sentences ;                                  conclusions; 
                                                                                                                   - no citations, tables,                      - bring summary          'numbers' ; 
                                                                                                                   equations, graphs etc.                        
                                      Introduction                - introduces the topic and                       - simple tense for reffering                 - use the    state-of-the-art      references; 
                                                                  defines the terminology           ;              to established knowledge or                  - follow the logical m         oves; 
                                                                  - relates to the existing                        past tense for literature                    - define y    our terminology         to avoid 
                                                                  research;                                        review;                                      confusion; 
                                                                  - indicated the focus         of the              
                                                                  paper and research objectives; 
                                                                   
                                      Methodology  - provides enough detail for                                    - past tense but active                      - mention every        thing y ou did that 
                                                                  competent res       earchers  to repeat          voice(!);                                    can make importance to the results; 
                                                                  the experim      ent;                            - correct and internationally                - don' t cover y     our traces ("som        e 
                                                                  - who, what, when,          where,  how          recognised sty       le and format           data was ignored"), establish an 
                                                                  and why ?                                        (units, variables, m        aterials         authors voice ("we decided to 
                                                                                                                   etc.);                                       ignored this data"); 
                                                                                                                                                                - if a technique is fam        iliar,  only use 
                                                                                                                                                                its name (don'       t re-explain); 
                                                                                                                                                                - use simple(st) exam ple to explain 
                                                                                                                                                                complex methodology              ; 
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                      Results                     - gives summary          results in              - past tense;                                - present sum       mary data related to 
                                                                  graphics and numbers;                            - use tables and graphs and                  the RA objectives and not all 
                                                                  - compares different                             other illustrations;                         research res ults; 
                                                                  'treatm ents';                                                                                - give more emphasise on what 
                                                                  - gives quantified proofs                                                                     should be emphasised - call 
                                                                  (statistical tests);                                                                          attention to the m       ost significant 
                                                                                                                                                                findings; 
                                                                                                                                                                - make clear separation between 
                                                                                                                                                                yours and others work; 
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                      Conclusions                 - ans wers research                              - sim ple or present tense                   - do not recapitulate res         ults but 
                                      and                         questions/objectives;                            (past tense if it is related to              make statements; 
                                      Discussion                  - explains discrepancies and                     results);                                    - make strong statements (avoid "It 
                                                                  unexpected findings;                             - allows scientific                          may be concluded... " s           tyle); 
                                                                  - states importance of                           speculations (if necessary           );      - do not hide unexpected results - 
                                                                  discoveries and future                                                                        they can be the m         ost important; 
                                                                  implications; 
                                      References                  - gives list of related literature               - depends on journal but                     - alway s cite the m       ost acces sible 
                                                                  and information sources;                         authors /editors , year and                  references; 
                                                                                                                   title m ust be included;                     - cite prim    ary source rather than 
                                                                                                                                                                review papers; 
                                     
                                    RA sub-structure  
                                    Participants also discovered that all RAS's can be separated in subsections or signposts, 
                                    which can be arbitrary, but improve the structure of a RA. The recognized subsections 
                                    were: research topic and definitions, research objectives (questions), methodological 
                                    techniques, experimental set-up, object of the study (e.g. study area), main discoveries 
                                    (analysed data), answers on research questions, explanation of the conclusions and 
                                    further research and implications. The main RAS's are listed in a flow chart, showing 
                                    main relations between different sections (Fig. 2). Fig. 3 shows the substructure of 
                                    Introduction and Discussion RAS as the most important RAS's.  
                                                                                                                           4 
                Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                 
                         INTRODUCTION
                                                           TITLE
                              TOPIC AND DEFINITIONS
                                FOCUS (THE GAP)          AUTHOR(S)
                                  OBJECTIVES
                                                         ABSTRACT
                         METHODOLOGY
                                  TECHNIQUES             KEY WORDS
                               EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
                                OBJECT OF STUDY         ABBREVATIONS
                            RESULTS                   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                MAIN DISCOVERIES
                             SUMMARY COMPARISSONS       REFERENCES
                        CONCLUSIONS &
                          DISCUSSION                     APPENDIX
                                   ANSWERS
                                 EXPLANATIONS
                              FURTHER IMPLICATIONS                    
                     Fig. 2. Flow diagram: research article sections (shaded) and subsections, and their main relations. 
                 
                       INTRODUCTION            DISCUSSION
                       INTRODUCE THE TOPIC     ANSWER RESEARCH
                                                  QUESTIONS
                        RELATE TO CURRENT     SUPPORT AND DEFEND
                           KNOWLEDGE         ANSWERS WITH RESULTS
                        INDICATE THE GAP          EXPLAIN:
                                             - Conflicting results you got
                                               - Unexpected findings
                                             - Discrepancies with other
                                                   research
                       INTRODUCE YOUR WORK
                                               STATE LIMITATIONS
                         STATE RESEARCH          OF THE STUDY
                         QUESTIONS AND
                           OBJECTIVES          STATE IMPORTANCE
                                                 OF FINDINGS
                                              ESTABLISH NEWNESS
                                              ANNOUNCE FURTHER
                                                  RESEARCH       
                     Fig. 3. Flow diagram: logical framework for RA sub-sections of Introduction and Discussion agreed by most of 
                            the participants. 
                 
                                                     5 
                 Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                  
                                      IV.  CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
                 What is the purpose of a RA and what makes it a good one, and who decides that it is a 
                 good RA? Are there rules for easier writing? If the main function of a RA is to transfer a 
    Answer       new knowledge on a research topic, then a good paper is the one that is clear, coherent, 
    research     focused, well argued and uses language that does not have ambiguous or equivoque 
    questions    meaning. However, it is not only the message that is important. The RA must have a 
                 well-defined structure and function in serve like a cook-book, so the others can 
    Give         reproduce and repeat explained experiments.  
    summary      There are some rules that can make the writing and publishing of RAs 'easier'. Here, we 
    conclusions  summarised some 'golden' rules that should always be in the mind of an inexperienced 
                 researcher (Table 3). We put all these together to make a final list of some 40 logical 
                 steps, which can be find in the Appendix. 
                  
                      Table 3. Selected golden rules for easier publishing. 
                  NAME GOLDEN RULE 
                  TAKE A READER'S VIEW       Write for your audience not for yourself. 
                  TELL A STORY               Direct your RA but keep a clear focus in the paper and present only 
                                             results that relate to it. 
                  BE YOURSELF                Write like you speak and then revise and polish. 
                  MAKE IT SIMPLE             Use simple(st) examples to explain complex methodology. 
                  MAKE IT CONCRETE           Use concrete words and strong verbs, avoid noun clusters (more 
                                             than three words), abstract and ambiguous words. 
                  MAKE IT SHORT              Avoid redundancy, repetition and over-explanation of familiar 
                                             techniques and terminology. 
                  TAKE RESPONSIBILITY        Make a clear distinction between your work and that of others. 
                  MAKE STRONG                "We concluded... " instead of "It may be concluded... "  
                  STATEMENTS 
                  BE SELF-CRITICAL           Consider uncertainty of conclusions and their implications and 
                                             acknowledge the work of others. 
                  
                 Although, it was assumed that the 'thicker' articles with wider range of vocabulary is 
   Unexpected  preferable in the editors hands, the editors (and probably the readers) prefer simple, 
   findings      clear and coherent writing, rather than a fancy or complex, pseudo-scientific style. Also 
                 Funkhouser and Maccoby (1971) showed that the information gain is especially 
                 enhanced by the “use of examples", i.e. it helps a lot to use some non-science material, 
                 such as everyday life parallels, historical points, etc. On the other hand, some sections, 
                 such as Introduction and Discussion, have to intrigue readers and attract interest and 
                 should therefore not be over-simplified. For example, a mysterious title can catch 
                 readers' attention and will be easily remembered (e.g.: T.Y. Li and J. Yorke named their 
                 famous paper on chaos: "The period three means chaos"). Some sections require more 
                 skill and are more important. It is approximated that from all published journal RAs in 
                 the world, only less than 5% are read in detail. However, more than 50% of abstracts are 
                 read and so the quality of an abstracts is much more important (Gordon, 1983). 
                 Therefore, the abstract should present the 'story' of the RA in miniature and should be 
                 readable standalone.  
                                                          6 
                  Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                   
                   
                  The sub-structure of an Introduction was first described by Swales (1981) with so called 
                  "four moves". These latter on become three, the so-called CaRS model (Create-A-
   Establish      Research-Space) that are: establish a research "territory", establish a research "niche" 
   newness        and occupy the niche (Swales and Feak, 1994). In this case, participants concluded that 
                  especially the meso-structure of the Introduction and Discussion RAS should follow 
                  some logical flow of 'moves' (Fig. 2 & 3). The more structured and more exact is the 
                  paper, the easier it will get published. Each of RA elements has to fulfil its function in 
                  order to achieve this goal. 
                   
                  However, this is not the whole story. A RA has to aim at specific audience/Journal, has 
   Explain dis-   to be novel and of high interest. Finally, one thing should be uppermost in researchers' 
   crepancies                                                                                              A GOOD 
                  minds: a good article is not only an article that has been published in a top journal - it is 
                                                                                                           ARTICLE IS 
                  the reaction it causes that makes the difference. Therefore, a good article is the one that 
                                                                                                           THE ONE 
                                                                                                           THAT IS 
                  is read and cited (Publish or Perish!). In some cases, even a good paper will get rejected 
                                                                                                           READ AND 
                  by the editors, i.e. journal. Unfortunately, sometimes the reasons can be subjective 
                              rd                                                                           CITED! 
                  (maybe 1/3  of all cases). Editors are often biased, they prefer one or other approach, 
                  academic level, gender... nation. These problems and issues such as fraud, plagiarism 
                  and ethics (Rossiter, 2001) were not discussed in this article but they certainly need 
                  attention. 
                   
                  The searching, input and formatting of references, has been lately largely improved by 
     Further      the help of so called "information management tools" (Endnote, ProCite etc.). In 
     research     addition, the role of companies involved in 'sorting' and 'filtering', such as Institute for 
     and          Scientific Information (ISI), will increase. In future, we can expect more structured 
     implications guidelines for writing a RA (templates?). The RA will also probably support multimedia 
                  (animations, sound recordings), which will improve communication between the 
                  readers/users and authors. These innovations will inevitably require require some new 
                  rules of thumb.  
                   
                  Acknowledgements 
                  We would like to thank Ian Cressie for their course and materials, which are of high importance for L2 
                  PhD students. We also thank PhD student Jose L.C. Santos and Dr. David G. Rossiter for reading the text 
                  and giving us suggestions.  
                   
                   
                   
                                                     V. REFERENCES 
                  Ackles, N., 1996. Naming a paper, ESL Center, University of Washington, Washington. 
                  ASA-CSA-SSSA, 1998. Publications Handbook and Style Manual. http:// www.asa-cssa-sssa.org/style98/, 
                          145 pp. 
                  Council of Biology Editors (CBE) (Editor), 1994. Scientific style and format. Cambridge University 
                          Press, Cambridge, 825 pp. 
                  Cressie, I., 2002. Writing & Editing Course, Lecture notes for ITC students. Enschede, pp. 120. 
                  Day, R.A. (Editor), 1994. How to write and publish a scientific paper. Oryx Pr., Phoenix, 223 pp. 
                  Funkhouser, G. R. and Maccoby, N., 1971. Communicating Specialized Science Information to a Lay 
                          Audience. The Journal of Communication, 21: 58. 
                  Gopen, G.D. and Swan, J.A., 1990. The Science of Scientific Writing. American Scientist, 78: 550-558. 
                  Gordon, M., 1983. Running a refeering system. Primary Communications Research Centre, Leicester. 
                  Gosden, H., 1992. Research Writing and NNSs: From the Editors. Journal of Second Language Writing, 
                          1(2): 123-139. 
                                                             7 
           Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
           Kirman, J., 1992. Good style: writing for science and technology. E. & F.N. Spon, London, 221 pp. 
           McPhee, L., 2001. Teaching the Research Article Introduction, First EATAW Conference: Teaching 
                Academic Writing Across Europe, Groningen. 
           O'Conner, M. and Woodford, F.P., 1976. Writing scientific papers in English. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 108 
                pp. 
           Prince, A., Blicblau, A.S. and Soesatyo, B., 1999. Implicit actions and explicit outcomes: cultural-
                academic interactions in writing journal research articles, AARE-NZARE.  Swinburne University 
                of Technology, pp. 8. 
           Rossiter, D.G., 2001. Preparation for MSc Thesis Research. ITC, Enschede, http://www.itc.nl/~rossiter/, 
                pp. 28. 
           Swales, J., 1981. Aspects of Article Introductions. ESP Research Report No.1, University of Aston, 
                Aston, UK. 
           Swales, J.M. and Feak, C., 1994. Academic Writing for Graduate Students. Ann Arbor, the University of 
                Michigan Press. 
           Trelease, S.F., 1958. How to write scientific and technical papers. Williams and Wilkens, Baltimore, 185 
                pp. 
            
            
            
                                      8 
                      Hengl, T. and Gould, M., 2002. Rules of thumb for writing research articles. 
                       
                                                                  VI. APPENDIX 
                       
                      STEP 1      Make a working title                                                                 Put it all 
                      STEP 2      Introduce the topic and define terminology                                           together: 
                      STEP 3      Emphasize why is the topic important                                                  
        MAKE          STEP 4      Relate to current knowledge: what's been done                                        writing a RA in 
        DRAFT         STEP 5      Indicate the gap: what need's to be done?                                             40 STEPS! 
                      STEP 6      Pose research questions                                                               
                      STEP 7      Give purpose and objectives 
                      STEP 8      List methodological steps 
                      STEP 9      Explain theory behind the methodology used 
                      STEP 1 0    Describe experimental set-up 
                      STEP 1 1    Describe object of the study (technical details) 
                      STEP 1 2    Give summary results 
                      STEP 1 3    Compare different results 
                      STEP 1 4    Focus on main discoveries 
                      STEP 1 5    Answer research questions (conclusions) 
                      STEP 1 6    Support and defend answers 
                      STEP 1 7    Explain conflicting results, unexpected findings and discrepancies with other 
                                  research 
                      STEP 1 8    State limitations of the study 
                      STEP 1 9    State importance of findings 
                      STEP 2 0    Establish newness 
                      STEP 2 1    Announce further research 
                      STEP 2 2    ABSTRACT: what was done, what was found and what are the main conclusions 
                       
                      STEP 2 3    Is the title clear and does it reflect the content and main findings? 
        REVISE  STEP 2 4  Are key terms clear and familiar?  
                      STEP 2 5    Are the objectives clear and relevant to the audience? 
                      STEP 2 6    Are all variables, techniques and materials listed, explained and linked to existing 
                                  knowledge - are the results reproducible? 
                      STEP 2 7    Are all results and comparisons relevant to the posed questions/objectives? 
                      STEP 2 8    Do some statements and findings repeat in the text, tables of figures? 
                      STEP 2 9    Do the main conclusions reflect the posed questions? 
                      STEP 3 0    Will the main findings be unacceptable by the scientific community? 
                      STEP 3 1    Is the text coherent, clear and focused on a specific problem/topic? 
                      STEP 3 2    Is the abstract readable standalone (does it reflects the main story)? 
                       
                      STEP 3 3    Are proper tenses and voices used (active and passive)? 
                      STEP 3 4    Are all equations mathematically correct and explained in the text? 
        POLISH        STEP 3 5    Are all abbreviations explained? 
                      STEP 3 6    Reconsider (avoid) using of words "very", "better", "may", "appears", "more", 
                                  "convinced", "impression" in the text. 
                      STEP 3 7    Are all abbreviations, measurement units, variables and techniques internationally 
                                  recognised (IS)?  
                      STEP 3 8    Are all figures/tables relevant and of good quality? 
                      STEP 3 9    Are all figures, tables and equations listed and mentioned in the text? 
                      STEP 4 0    Are all references relevant, up to date and accessible? 
                       
                                                                           9 
