                                                                                                         
                                                                                                LED-it-GO 
                                         Leaking (a lot of) Data from Air-Gapped Computers via the (small) Hard Drive LED 
                                                                                                         
                                                             Mordechai Guri, Boris Zadov, Eran Atias,Yuval Elovici 
                                                                            Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 
                                                                               Cyber Security Research Center 
                                                         gurim@post.bgu.ac.il; borisza@gmail.com; elovici@bgu.ac.il 
                                                             Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vIu8ld68fc 
                                Abstract 
                                In this paper we present a method which allows attackers to covertly leak data from isolated, 
                                air-gapped computers. Our method utilizes the hard disk drive (HDD) activity LED which 
                                exists in most of today’s desktop PCs, laptops and servers. We show that a malware can 
                                indirectly control the HDD LED, turning it on and off rapidly (up to 5800 blinks per second) – 
                                a rate that exceeds the visual perception capabilities of humans. Sensitive information can be 
                                encoded and leaked over the LED signals, which can then be received remotely by different 
                                kinds of cameras and light sensors. Compared to other LED methods, our method is unique, 
                                because it is also covert - the HDD activity LED routinely flickers frequently, and therefore the 
                                user may not be suspicious to changes in its activity. We discuss attack scenarios and present 
                                the necessary technical background regarding the HDD LED and its hardware control. We also 
                                present various data modulation methods and describe the implementation of a user-level 
                                malware, that doesn't require a kernel component. During the evaluation, we examine the 
                                physical characteristics of different  colored HDD LEDs (red, blue, and white) and tested 
                                different types of receivers: remote cameras, 'extreme' cameras, security cameras, smartphone 
                                cameras,  drone  cameras,  and  optical  sensors.  Finally,  we  discuss  hardware  and  software 
                                countermeasures for such a threat. Our experiment shows that sensitive data can be successfully 
                                leaked from air-gapped computers via the HDD LED at a maximum bit rate of 4000 bit/s (bits 
                                per second), depending on the type of receiver and its distance from the transmitter. Notably, 
                                this speed is 10 times faster than the existing optical covert channels for air-gapped computers. 
                                These rates allow fast exfiltration of encryption keys, keystroke logging, and text and binary 
                                files. 
                                 
                                                                                           I.     INTRODUCTION 
                                In the modern cyber era, attackers have proven that they can breach many organizations thought 
                                to  be  secured.  They  employ  sophisticated  social  engineering  methods  and  exploit  0-day 
                                vulnerabilities in order to infiltrate the target network, while bypassing defense measures such 
                                as intrusion detection and prevention systems (IDS/IPS), firewalls, antivirus programs, and the 
                                like. For that reason, when highly sensitive information is involved, so-called air-gap isolation 
                                is used. In air-gap isolation, a network is kept separate, physically and logically, from public 
                                networks such as the Internet. Air-gapped networks are commonly used in military defense 
                                systems, critical infrastructure, banks and the financial sector, and others industries [1] [2].  
                                But despite the high degree of isolation, even air-gapped network are not immune to breaches. 
                                In recent years it has been shown that even air-gapped networks can become compromised. In 
                                order to breach such networks, attackers have used complex attack vectors, such as supply chain 
                                attacks, malicious insiders, and social engineering. While the most well-known breach cases 
                                are Stuxnet [3] and agent.btz [4], other attacks have also been reported [5] [6] [3] [7] [8].    
                       A.  Leaking data through an air-gap 
                       While infiltrating air-gapped systems has been shown feasible in recent years, the exfiltration 
                       of data from systems without networking or physical access, or Internet connectivity is still 
                       considered a challenging task. Over the years, different types of air-gap covert channels (that 
                       is, covert channels aimed at leaking data from air-gapped computers) have been proposed. The 
                       electromagnetic emission from computer components is one type of covert channel that has 
                       been extensively studied. In this method, a malware controls the electromagnetic emission from 
                       computer parts, including the screen, cables, processors and other peripherals [9] [10] [11] [12] 
                       [13]. Leaking data over ultrasonic waves [14] [15] and via thermal manipulations [16] have 
                       also been studied.  
                       A few types of optical covert channels have been presented as well. In particular, leaking data 
                       via the blinks made by keyboard LEDs, or by inserting malicious hardware with controlled 
                       LEDs into an organization. However, these methods are not considered completely covert, 
                       since they can easily be detected by people who notice the anomalous LED blinking. Generally 
                       speaking, because optical and LED methods are considered less covert, they have not received 
                       as much attention from researchers. 
                       B.  Our contribution    
                       In this paper we present a method that enables malware to leak data from air-gapped computers 
                       using the HDD activity LED which is present in nearly all desktop and laptop computers today. 
                       A malware can manipulate the HDD LED and control its blinking period and speed, by using 
                       certain HDD I/O operations, such as 'read' and 'write.' We show that arbitrary data can be 
                       modulated and transmitted over the optical signals.  
                       Compared with existing optical methods, our method is unique in five ways: 
                          Covertness. Until now, leaking data through PC LEDs has not been considered covert – 
                           given the irregular and inconstant nature of the blinking of keyboard and screen power 
                           LEDs, hence leaking data through these LEDs can be easily detected. In contrast, our 
                           method is considered covert, because unlike the keyboard and screen LEDs, HDD activity 
                           LEDs are frequently active, and manipulations of the blinking timing and speed may not 
                           draw special attention.  
                          Speed. Our measurements show that the HDD LED can be controlled and adjusted to 
                           operate at a relatively fast speed (over 4000Hz). Therefore, we were able to transmit 
                           messages at a faster speed than other LEDs methods were able to achieve. This rate allowed 
                           the exfiltration of an encryption key of 4096 bits in a matter of minutes (and even seconds), 
                           depending on the receiver.  
                          Visibility. When the HDD LED blinks for short period of time, humans may not be able to 
                           perceive its activity [17]. Moreover, at high speeds (e.g., above 400Hz), the LED flickering 
                           is invisible to humans, making the channel more covert. 
                          Availability. Our method does not require any special hardware. It works with any 
                           computer that has an HDD activity LED. This component is found on most desktop PCs, 
                           laptops, and servers today. 
                          Privilege level. Activating the HDD LED can be initiated from an ordinary user-level 
                           code, and does not required special component in the OS kernel.  
                            
                       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we present related work. Section III 
                       describes  the  adversarial  attack  model.  Section  IV  provides  technical  background.  Data 
                       modulation and transmission are discussed in Section V. Section VI presents the evaluation and 
                       results. Countermeasures are discussed in Section VII, and we present our conclusions in 
                       Section VIII. 
                                
                                                                                       II.     RELATED WORK 
                               Leaking data from air-gapped computers via covert channels has been the subject of research 
                               for the past twenty years. Air-gap covert channels can be categorized as electromagnetic, 
                               acoustic, thermal, and optical channels. In electromagnetic methods, the attacker modulates 
                               data over of the electromagnetic signals generated by various components within the computer.  
                               A.  Electromagnetic 
                               Back in 1998, Kuhn and Anderson [10] introduced the 'Soft Tempest' attack which involved 
                               hidden data transmission using electromagnetic emanations from a video cable. AirHopper [9], 
                               introduced in 2014, is a type of malware aimed at leaking data from air-gapped computers to a 
                               nearby mobile phone by generating FM radio signals from the video card. GSMem malware 
                               [13],  presented  in  2105,  enables  leaking  data  at  cellular  frequencies  via  electromagnetic 
                               emission, generated by the computer RAM bus. More recently, researchers presented USBee 
                               and Funthenna [18] which exploits the electromagnetic interference generated by the USB and 
                               GPIO buses. Matyunin et al use the magnetic field sensors of mobile devices as a covert channel 
                               [19]. Other electromagnetic and magnetic covert channels are discussed in [20]. 
                               B.  Sonic/ultrasonic 
                               Near ultrasonic methods for air-gap covert channels are discussed in a number of academic 
                               works. Hanspach and Goetz [21] present a method for near ultrasonic covert networking using 
                               speakers and microphones in laptops. The concept of communicating over inaudible sounds has 
                               been comprehensively examined by Lee et al [22] and has also been extended for different 
                               scenarios using laptops and mobile phones [23] . Guri et al introduced Fansmitter [24] and 
                               Disfiltration [25], new methods enabling acoustic data exfiltration from computers without 
                               speakers or audio hardware. The proposed methods utilized computer fans and hard drives to 
                               generate acoustic signals. 
                               C.  Thermal 
                               BitWhisper  [26]  is  a  unique  air-gap  covert  channel,  allowing  bidirectional  covert 
                               communication between adjacent air-gapped computers, using the computers’ heat emissions 
                               and the built-in thermal sensors of the computers’ motherboards.   
                               D. Optical  
                               In the optical domain, Loughry and Umphress [27] and Sepetnitsky and Guri [28] discuss the 
                               risks of intentional information leakage through optical signals sent from the keyboard and 
                               screen LEDs. They implemented malware that control the keyboard and screen power LEDs to 
                               transfer data to a remote camera. The main drawback of these methods is that they are less 
                               covert: since the keyboard and screen LEDs don’t blink typically, users can easily detect this 
                               type of communication. Shamir et al demonstrated how to establish a covert channel with a 
                               malware over the air-gap using a blinking laser and standard all-in-one-printer [29]. However, 
                               this method is also not covert and its success relies upon user absence. More recently, Lopes 
                               and Arana [30] presented a novel approach for air-gap data exfiltration using a malicious 
                               storage device which transmits data through blinking infrared LEDs. In this way, an attacker 
                               can leak sensitive data stored on the device, such as credentials and cryptographic keys, at a 
                               speed of 15 bit/s. The computer need not be infected with a malware, but this approach does 
                               require the attacker find a way to insert the compromised hardware implanted with infrared 
                               LEDs into the organization. Brasspup [31] demonstrated how to conceal secret images in a 
                               modified LCD screen. His method required removing the polarization filter of the LCD screen 
                               which makes it less practical for real world attacks. VisiSploit [32] is another optical covert 
                               channel in which data is leaked from the LCD screen to a remote camera via a so-called 
                               'invisible image.' With this method, a remote camera can reconstruct an invisible QR code 
                               projected on the computer screen.  
                               Table 1 summarizes the different types of existing air-gap covert channels and presents their 
                               maximum bandwidth and effective distance. 
                                    
                                                           Table 1. Different type of air-gap covert channels and distances 
                                  Method                          Examples                                          Max bandwidth             Effective Distance 
                                  Electromagnetic             AirHopper [9]                                         480 bit/s                 ~5-10 meters 
                                                              GSMem [13]                                            1 to 1000 bit/s 
                                                              USBee                                                 4800 bit/s 
                                                              Funthenna [11] 
                                  Acoustic                    [15] [14] [22] [23] [33]                              <100 bit/s                ~15 meters 
                                                              Fan noise (Fansmitter) [24]                           900 bit/h 
                                                              Hard disk noise (DiskFiltration) [25]                 10K bit/h 
                                  Thermal                     BitWhisper                                            1-8 bit/h                 40 cm 
                                  Optical (LEDs)              (unmodified) Keyboard LEDs  [27]                      150 bit/s                 Line of sight 
                                                              Screen LEDs [28]                                      20 bit/s 
                                                              Implanted infrared LEDs [30]                          15 bit/s 
                                                              Hard drive LED (this paper)                           4000 bit/s                Line of sight 
                               
                              The method presented in this paper has two main advantages compared to other LED based 
                              methods: its covertness and its speed. The state of keyboard and screen power LEDs does 
                              change frequently, and it is likely that any blinking caused by tampering with this channel will 
                              be obvious to observers. On the other hand, the HDD activity LED blinks frequently (due to 
                              OS background operations), and hence the effects of communication via this channel (changes 
                              in the blinking patter) will not arouse attention. The exfiltration speed we achieved with the 
                              HDD LED is up to 4000 bit/s, much higher than existing air-gap LED methods. 
                               
                                                                           III.    ADVERSARIAL ATTACK MODEL 
                              The attack model consists of two phases: (1) infecting the target computer with a malware, and 
                              (2) receiving and decoding the signals that were leaked through the HDD LED. 
                              Infection. As demonstrated in recent years, infecting a computer within a secure network can 
                              be  accomplished.  Attackers  may  employ  supply  chain  attacks,  use  social  engineering 
                              techniques, or launch hardware with preinstalled malware to obtain a foothold in the target 
                              machine  [34]  [35]  [36].  The  malware  then  gathers  sensitive  information  from  the  user's 
                              computer (e.g., keystrokes, password, encryption keys, and documents). Eventually it starts 
                              transmitting the binary data through the blinking HDD LED using a selected encoding scheme. 
                              Reception and Decoding. The attack model also requires a digital camera or optical sensor 
                              which has a line of sight with the compromised computer's front panel. We identify two 
                              scenarios in which this threat model is relevant: (1) the 'malicious insider' [37] (also known as 
                              the 'evil maid' [38] attack), in which a person carrying a hidden camera can obtain a line of 
                              sight with the compromised computer, and (2) a scenario involving a type of remote camera or 
                              optical sensor pointed at the compromised computer [39]. 
                              There are several types of equipment that can play the role of the receiver in this attack model. 
                                   Local hidden camera. A hidden camera that has a line of sight to the front panel of the 
                                    transmitting computer. 
                                   High resolution remote camera. A high resolution camera (or other type of optical sensor) 
                                    which is located outside the building, but positioned so it has a line of sight with front panel 
                                    of the transmitting computer. 
                                   Drone camera. A camera installed on a versatile drone which is flown to a location which 
                                    has a line of sight with the front panel of the transmitting computer, e.g., near the window. 
                           This type of receiver is relevant for leaking a small amount of data (e.g., leaking encryption 
                           keys).  
                          Camera carried by malicious insider. A person that stands in close proximity to the 
                           computer, and can position him/herself so as to have a line of sight with the front panel of 
                           the transmitting computer, carrying a smartphone or wearable video camera (e.g., hidden 
                           camera). 
                          Compromised security camera. A security camera positioned in a location where it has a 
                           line of sight with the front panel of the transmitting computer. A comprehensive analysis 
                           of the threats, vulnerabilities, and attacks on video surveillance, closed-circuit TV, and IP 
                           camera systems was conducted by Costin in [39]. 
                          Optical sensors. An optical sensor capable of sensing the light emitted from the HDD 
                           LED. Such sensors are used extensively in VLC (visible light communication) and LED to 
                           LED communication [40]. Notably, optical sensors are capable of sampling LED signals at 
                           high rates, enabling data reception at a higher bandwidth than a typical video camera.  
                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                        Figure 1. Example of the attack. A leaking HDD LED (the red LED at the center of the image) as captured 
                                     by a hidden video camera eight meters away from the transmitting computer.   
                        
                       An example of the covert channel is provided in Figure 1 in which sensitive data is encoded in 
                       binary form and covertly transmitted over a stream of HDD LED signals. A hidden video 
                       camera films the activity in the room, including the LED signals. The attacker can then decode 
                       the signals and reconstruct the modulated data. 
                        
                                                          IV.   TECHNICAL BACKGROUND 
                       LED (light emitting diode) is a two-lead semiconductor light source that illuminates when an 
                       electrical charge passes through it. LEDs are used as activity indicators in a wide range of 
                       electronic devices. In addition, LEDs of different size and colors are also used in various 
                       applications such as advertising, home lighting, automotive industry and traffic signals. The 
                       wavelength of the emitted light (which is indicated by its color) is determined by the material 
           used in the semiconducting element within the LED. Generally, aluminum gallium indium 
           phosphide (AlGaInP) is used in red, orange, and yellow LEDs, and indium gallium nitride 
           (InGaN) is used in green, blue, and white LEDs.   
           LED indicators are commonly used in desktop and laptop computers and their peripheral 
           hardware  components.  Computer  LEDs  include  the  power  and  keyboard  LEDs.  Many 
           motherboards have an internal onboard power LED that indicates whether there are hardware 
           errors. 
           A.  Hard drive activity LED 
           The HDD activity indicator is a small LED that blinks whenever the hard drive is active (being 
           read from or written to). A schematic flow of the HDD activity LED’s operation is provided in 
           Figure 2. Technically, internal hard disk drives in desktop and laptop computers are connected 
           to the motherboard via a SATA/IDE interface or another type of mass storage device interface 
           (Figure 2-1). The motherboard hard drive controller sends signals via the HDD activity header 
           pins over the standard 2-pin HDD LED extension cable (Figure 2-2). These signals cause an 
           LED on the front of a computer to flash when the drive is active. The signals are sent to the 
           LED whenever 'read' or 'write' operations have been issued to the HDD. Some large computer 
           cases (e.g., server PCs) have multiple hard disk activity LEDs, to allow for separate connection 
           of a number of drives. External hard drives and flash drives are usually equipped with an 
           activity LED as well. In these cases, the LED is connected to the embedded controller of the 
           flash drive. 
                                            SATA cable
                                                     storage
                                   1
                        read/write
                                SATA Controller 
             Operating System
                                (motherboard)
                                              2
                                                   HDD Indicator LED
                                            2-wire 
                                            power cable
                                                              
                      Figure 2. Schematic flow of the HDD activity LED operation. 
            
           On a desktop PC the HDD LED is located on the front panel of the computer. On a laptop the 
           HDD LED is usually located on the front control bar (located above the keyboard) or on the 
           front edge of the computer. The activity LED of an external HDD is usually located on the front 
           of its case. The LED light may be any color, depending on the type of computer, but it is usually 
           white, red, green, yellow, or blue. 
           B.  HDD LED circuit hardware 
           The HDD activity LED is connected to the motherboard circuit using a 2-pin extension cable. 
           To activate the component two parameters are needed: forward voltage of at least 2V, and 
           forward current of 20-130mA, depending on type of LED. Digital output ports cannot provide 
           an adequate amount of current needed to operate the LED, and thus an extra electronic circuit, 
           called an LED driver, is needed to fulfill the working requirements. Figure 3 presents the two 
           driver circuits commonly used in motherboards. The circuit in Figure 3(a) is based on an NPN 
           transistor connected in common emitter configuration. The circuit in Figure 3(b) based on an 
           operational amplifier. Both circuits can provide the amount of current needed to operate the 
           LED.     
                       
                       
                                                       V+                                       V+
                                           R              R                         R               R
                                            1              2                         1               2
                                                                                                       HDD 
                                                                                                        LED
                                                              HDD 
                                                               LED
                              Activity 
                                                                       Activity 
                                                         T1
                               signal 
                                                                        signal 
                               input
                                                                                              LED 
                                                                        input
                                                                                             Driver
                                                     (a)                                    (b)
                                                                                                                  
                      Figure 3. The two common motherboard LED driver circuits. (a) A common emitter configuration with self-
                                     biasing implementation. (b) Operational amplifier based implementation. 
                       
                      The circuit presented in Figure 3(a) is less expensive than the circuit in Figure 3(b), and it has 
                      more limited current amplification (150-550). The more expensive circuit in Figure 3(b) is 
                      based  on  an  operational  amplifier  and  has  a  comparator  configuration  with  open  loop 
                                         6
                      amplification of 10 , allowing faster responsivity to the input signal; in addition it has only two 
                      voltage levels (5v and 0v). This circuit also has better immunization to the input. 
                       
                                                          V.    DATA TRANSMISSION 
                      In this section we present the data transmission. We discuss the basic signal generation and 
                      describe different modulation methods, along with their implementation details.  
                      A.  Signal generation 
                      In our method, the data carrier is the state of the HDD LED. The basic signal is generated by 
                      turning  the  LED  on  and  off.  Technically,  the  HDD  LED  is  controlled  directly  by  the 
                      motherboard chipset. We found that there is no reliable generic API that can be used to enable 
                      a software to request the motherboard to turn on the HDD indicator LED. In order to generate 
                      the signal, we can indirectly control the LED by performing specific HDD 'read' or 'write' 
                      operations. These operations cause the motherboard to turn on the HDD LED for a specified 
                      amount of time, depending on the size of the buffer being read or written to the storage device. 
                      Table 2 lists the OS level operations and the corresponding LED states, denoted as LED-ON 
                      and LED-OFF. As can be seen, reading or writing a buffer size ࡿ causes the HDD LED to be 
                      turned on for the time period of  ܶ  . Sleeping for time ܶ    causes the HDD LED to be turned 
                                                        ௢௡                      ௢௙௙
                      off for a period of ܶ   . 
                                          ௢௙௙
                                                              Table 2. Signal time  
                                          OS operation                HDD-LED state 
                                          read/write (ࡿ)              LED-ON for time ܶ    (ܵ) 
                                                                                         ݋݊ 
                                          sleep (ࢀ  )                 LED-OFF for time ܶ      
                                                 ࢕ࢌࢌ                                      ݋݂݂
                      
                     B.  Data encoding 
                     The topic of  visible  light  communication  has  been  widely  studied  in  the  last  decade.  In 
                     particular, various modulations and encoding schemes have been proposed for LED to LED 
                     communication [40] [41] [42]. For our purposes, we present three basic encoding schemes 
                     which enable the transmission of digital data over the HDD LED: (1) on-off keying (OOK), (2) 
                     Manchester encoding, and (3) Binary Frequency Shift Keying (B-FSK).  
                       1)  On-off keying (OOK) 
                     This is the simplest form of the more general amplitude-shift keying (ASK) modulation. The 
                     presence of a signal for a certain duration encodes a logical one ("1"), while its absence for the 
                     same duration encodes a logical zero ("0"). In our case, LED-ON for a duration ܶ  encodes 
                                                                                                         ௢௡
                     "1" and LED-OFF for duration of ܶ        encodes "0". Note that in the simple case ܶ   =ܶ    . 
                                                         ௢௙௙                                            ௢௡    ௢௙௙
                       2)  Manchester encoding 
                     In Manchester encoding each logical bit is sent using two physical bits. The sequence of 
                     physical bits "01" (LED-OFF, LED-ON) encodes a logical "0" and the sequence of physical 
                     bits "10" (LED-ON, LED-OFF) encodes a logical "1". Manchester encoding solves the LED 
                     flickering problem by sending an equal number of ones and zeroes. Manchester encoding’s 
                     transfer rate is half of that of OOK, since it uses two physical bits for each logical bit. This type 
                     of encoding is considered more reliable because of the redundancy of each transmitted bit; 
                     therefore it is heavily used in communication. 
                       3)  Binary Frequency Shift Keying (B-FSK) 
                     In this encoding scheme both a logical "1" and "0" are encoded by LED-ON. A logical "1" is 
                     encoded by the LED-ON state for time duration of ܶ (ܵ ), and a logical "0" is encoded by the 
                                                                          ௢௡ ଵ
                     LED-ON state for time duration of ܶ (ܵ ). Each logical bit is followed by a guard interval 
                                                            ௢௡ ଴
                     (LED-OFF) for a time interval of ܶ     . 
                                                         ௢௙௙
                     C.  Bit framing 
                     We transmit the binary data in frames. The frames have two roles: (1) providing periodic 
                     synchronization signals to the receiver, and (2) providing a basic error check mechanism for 
                     each sent packet of bytes. 
                     We used two types of bit framing: (1) fixed length framing, and (2) variable length framing. 
                                                        Table 3. Fixed length framing 
                                        8 bits                           256 bits                   16 bits 
                                 Preamble (10101010)                     Payload                     CRC 
                      
                                                      Table 4. Variable length framing 
                                        8 bits                16 bits               n bits          16 bits 
                                 Preamble (10101010)      Payload size (n)         Payload           CRC 
                      
                     In fixed length framing (Table 3) the binary data is transmitted in small, fixed size packets. 
                     Each packet is composed of a preamble (8 bits), a payload (256 bits), and a checksum (16 bits). 
                     The preamble consists of a sequence of eight alternating bits ('10101010') and is used by the 
                     receiver to periodically determine the channel timing (ܶ    and ܶ   ). In addition, the preamble 
                                                                             ௢௡       ௢௙௙
                     header allows the receiver to identify the beginning of a transmission and calibrate other 
                     parameters, such as the intensity and color of the transmitting LED. The payload is a chunk of 
                     256 bits to be transmitted. We used a 16-bit CRC (cyclic redundancy check) for error detection. 
                   The CRC is computed on the payload and added to the end of the frame. The receiver calculates 
                   the CRC for the received payload, and if it differs from the received CRC, an error is detected. 
                   In variable length framing (Table 4) the binary data is transmitted in packets with varying 
                   length. The preamble is followed by 16 bits which determine the payload size. The payload size 
                   may differ between packets. Finally, the 16-bit CRC of the payload is added to the end of the 
                   frame.  
                   Note that fixed length bit framing is more suitable for cases in which a small amount of fixed 
                   sized data is about to be transmitted (e.g., encryption keys and passwords). With a larger amount 
                   of data (e.g., files), variable length framing may be better, because it can transmit the entire 
                   amount of data in fewer packets, while saving the overhead of the frame headers. However, in 
                   some circumstances larger frames are more wasteful, since a single bit error may corrupt the 
                   whole frame. 
                   D. Implementation 
                   We implemented a prototype of the transmitter for the Linux OS. We choose to use the read 
                   operation to turn on the HDD activity LED, because it leaves no traces on the file system. We 
                   executed a C program which uses the direct addressing system calls and the fseek(), fopen(), 
                   and fread() system calls [43] [44]. We also implemented a shell script version of the transmitter 
                   using the Linux dd command-line utility [45]. This is a low level utility of Linux which can 
                   perform a wide range of HDD operations (e.g., read or copy) at the file or block level. A 
                   pseudocode for on-off keying transmission is provided in algorithm 1. 
                    
                               Algorithm 1    HDDLED_TransmitBit 
                               1: procedure transmitBits(bits, T0, ReadSize) 
                               2:  sync(); //drop cache 
                               3:  hddDev = open(/dev/sda) 
                               4:  offset = 0 
                               5:  offsetIncrement = BLOCK_SIZE; 
                               6:  seek(hddDev, offset); 
                               7:  for(b in bits) 
                               8:       if (b='0') then  
                               9:          sleep (T0); 
                               10:    if (b='1') then  
                               11:         seek(hddDev, offset); 
                               12:         read(hddDev, ReadSize); 
                               13:         offset += offsetIncrement  
                               14:  end for 
                               15:  return; 
                    
                   The procedure HDDLED_TransmitBit takes three parameters: the stream of bits to transmit (bits), 
                   time ܶ    (T0), and the size of the buffer for the read operation (ReadSize), which determines 
                         ௢௙௙
                   ܶ (ܵ). Initially, the cache is cleared (line 2), and then we open the main hard drive for reading 
                    ௢௡
                   (line 3). Since the OS performs HDD reads in small size blocks (BLOCK_SIZE), we must 
                   ensure that two consecutive reads are taken on different blocks in the HDD; otherwise, the 
                   second read operation will not generate HDD access (LED activity), because the block is 
                   already in the cache. For each bit in the bit stream, if the bit is '0' we do nothing for time T0 
                   (line 8-9). If the bit is '1' then a read operation is performed, and we advance to the next block 
                   (line 11-13). 
                   E.  Caching avoidance 
                   In order to efficiently modulate data over the LED signal, we need to precisely control the 
                   duration of the read operations. In particular, we need to be able to perform the read operation 
                   at a given time without delay. Modern OSs employ disk and file I/O caching mechanisms in 
                       their kernel or device drivers. Such caching can cause timing delays and inconsistencies in the 
                       generation of LED signals. For efficient and error-free signal generation, we must avoid any 
                       type of caching during the read operation. Before the transmissions, we turned off the disk 
                       caching  using  the  /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches,  in  order  to  instruct  the  kernel  to  free  the 
                       pagecache, dentries, and inodes. We also turned off the HDD write-back cache mechanism, 
                       using the hdparm command line tool [46]. In the shell script, we used the dd tool with 'direct' 
                       flag (use direct I/O for data), and 'sync' flag (use synchronized I/O for data). 
                        
                                                                   VI.   EVALUATION 
                       In this section we present the evaluation of the transmitter and its characteristics. Note that the 
                       concept of LED communication was the subject of a considerable amount of research in recent 
                       years. Today it is possible to transmit signals over LEDs at a rate of 500 Mbit/s [42] [47]. Other 
                       research shows that it is possible to decode LED signals from more than 30 meters away [27]. 
                       Our evaluation focuses on the characteristics of the HDD LED and its rate. In our evaluation, 
                       we adapt the approach commonly used in visible light communication (VLC), which assumes 
                       a line of sight between the light source and the camera [27] [41]. 
                       The experimental setup consists of three off the shelf standard desktop PCs, each with a 
                       different type of HDD LED (Table 5). Note that although most HDD indication LEDs are red, 
                       many vendors today are using different colors. For the evaluation we used red, blue, and white 
                       types of HDD LEDs. 
                                Table 5. PCs used in our experimental setup with red, blue, and white HDD indicator LEDs 
                         #        Case type          LED         Motherboard             Hard Drive 
                         PC-1     Infinity           Red         Gigabyte H87M-          - WD Blue 1TB Desktop Hard Disk 
                                                                 D3H                     Drive - 7200 RPM SATA 6Gb/s 
                                                                                         64MB Cache 3.5" 
                                                                                         - Kingston HyperX Savage SSD, 
                                                                                         240GB 
                         PC-2     Gigabyte           Blue        Gigabyte H77-D3H        Seagate Desktop HDD 1TB 64MB 
                                                                                         Cache SATA 6.0Gb/s 3.5"  
                         PC-3     Dell Optiplex      White       Intel Q87(LYNX          WD Blue 1TB Desktop Hard Disk 
                                  9020                           POINT)                  Drive - 7200 RPM SATA 6Gb/s 
                                                                                         64MB Cache 3.5"" 
                        
                       The main PC has an Infinity case with a Gigabyte H87M-D3H motherboard with Intel® H87 
                       chipsets. We tested two hard drives. The first is the WD Blue 1TB Desktop Hard Disk Drive - 
                       7200 RPM SATA 6Gb/s 64MB Cache 3.5 Inch. Based on a benchmark that we conducted in 
                       our lab, this HDD has a read rate of 144.2 MB/s and an access time of 14.7ms. We also tested 
                       the  240GB Kingston HyperX Savage solid state drive (SSD). A small circular red HDD 
                       indicator LED is located on the front of the computer chassis. This LED is connected to two 
                       pins in the motherboard (HD LED pins), which supply its voltage. In terms of software we used 
                       the user-level transmitting program described in the Implementation sub-section. This program 
                       receives  the  channel  parameters (LED-ON  and  LED-OFF times) and the array of bits to 
                       transmit. 
                       A.  LED measurement setup 
                       To  evaluate  the  HDD  LED  at  high  speeds  we  designed  a  measurement  setup  based  on 
                       photodiode light sensors.  
                       Setup. Very simply, a photodiode is a semiconductor that converts light into electrical current. 
                       The measurement setup is shown in Figure 4. The photodiode was connected to the charge 
                   configuration  amplifier  AD549  [48]  (with  0.11  fA  current  noise  density)  and  the  data 
                   acquisition system. Data was collected with the NI cDAQ measurement system with a 16-bit 
                   ADC NI9223 measurement card [49] which is capable of 200K samples per second. The system 
                   was driven by the LabVIEW dataflow visual programming language.  
                                                    R
                                                      f
                                  Photodiode
                                                                                              3
                                                                                              2
                                                                                              2
                                                                             Channel 1
                                                                                              9
                                                                                               
                                                                                              I
                                                                                              N
                                                                                                
                    Figure 4. The light measurement experimental setup, based on a photodiode and NI acquisition system with 
                                                     high speed sampling rate. 
                    
                   Sensors. We used two type of photodiodes: (1) SIEMENS photodiode SFH-2030 (Figure 5(a)), 
                   a device which is suitable for sensing light at wavelengths of 400-1100 nm, dark current of 
                   1nA, 55nsec of current rise and fall time, and (2) Thorlabs PDA100A Si Switchable Gain 
                   Detector [50] (Figure 5(b)), suitable for sensing light at wavelengths of 320-1100 nm, 2.4 MHz 
                   BW, 0.973 - 27 pW/Hz1/2 with a built-in amplifier.  
                                                                                   
                              Figure 5. (a) SIEMENS photodiode SFH-2030, and (b) Thorlabs PDA100A sensor. 
                    
                   The two sensors fit into different attack models. The SIEMENS photodiode circuit is a simple, 
                   small sensor that could be secretly hidden in the room in which the transmitter computer is 
                   located. The Thorlabs PDA100A is a larger device with a built-in optimized amplifier and an 
                   option to connect an external lens used to magnify and focus the light signal. Such a larger 
                   sensor may be located remotely (e.g., outside the window), carried by human, or integrated on 
                   a flying drone. 
                   B.  The transmitter  
                   As mentioned, the HDD activity LED cannot be controlled directly by software. Instead, we 
                   perform the 'read' operation from the OS, which in turn causes the HDD controller on the 
                   motherboard to turn on the HDD indication LED. We examine the correlation between ܵ and 
                   ܶ (ܵ), denoting the number of bytes we read as ܵ and the time the LED was on as ܶ (ܵ). This 
                    ௢௡                                                                          ௢௡
                   information is important, because it enables us to configure the parameters of the transmitting 
                   software. We also evaluate the channel boundaries to determine the maximum frequency on 
                   which the HDD LED can operate and the maximum bandwidth. 
                                                  Table 6. LED-ON measurements 
                     Read volume (ࡿ)              LED-ON Time (ࢀ࢕࢔(ࡿ))       Bit/s 
                     60000000 (60MB)              630 ms                     1.6 bit/s 
             15120000 (15MB)  250 msec        4 bps bit/s 
             80000000 (8MB)   60 msec         16 bit/s 
             5120000 (5MB)    32 msec         30 bit/s 
             1280000 (1.2MB)  5 msec          180 bit/s 
             800000 (800KB)   3.6 msec        277 bit/s 
             600000 (600KB)   3.2 msec        312 bit/s 
             512000 (512KB)   2 msec          500 bit/s 
             256000 (256KB)   1.2 msec        833 bit/s 
             <4KB             0.18 msec       4000 bit/s 
             
            We configured the transmitter to perform the 'read' operation with varying the number of bytes 
            (ܵ). Using the LED measurement setup described above, we measured the corresponding LED-
            ON time (ܶ (ܵ)). The photodiodes were positioned directly in front of the HDD LED, and 
                  ௢௡
            located a distance from zero to several meters away. Table 6 contains the main values of  ܵ and 
            the corresponding ܶ (ܵ). 
                       ௢௡
             
                                                            
            Figure 6. PC-1 measurements with pulse width of (a) 680 msec (ࡿ = ૟૙ࡹ ), (b) 32 msec (ࡿ = ૞ࡹ࡮), (c) 3.6 
                          msec (ࡿ = ૙.ૡࡹ࡮), and (d) 0.18 msec  (ࡿ  =  ૝ࡷ). 
                                       
            Figure 6 shows the waveforms of binary '101010…' (encoded in OOK) transmitted at a rate of 
            1.6 bit/s, 30 bit/s, 277 bit/s, and 4000 bit/s, respectively. In this case, the transmitter is the PC-
            1 (red LED), and the receiver is the SIEMENS photodiode. Note that our LED-ON 
            measurement includes a duty cycle of 50%. 
                                a
                                b
                                 c
                                                                                                              
                         Figure 7. Measurements for (a) PC-1 (red LED), (b) PC-2 (blue LED), and (c) PC-3 (white LED) 
                                                                   
                    Figure 7 provides measurements for transmissions made from PC-1 (red LED), PC-2 (blue 
                    LED), and PC-3 (white LED). In this experiment we use the PDA100A sensor with ܵ  = 4ܭ. 
                    PC-1 has a pulse width of 0.18 msec and an amplitude 5.3V. PC-2 shows a pulse width of 0.12 
                    msec and an amplitude of 0.71V. PC-3 shows a pulse width of 0.1 msec and an amplitude of 
                    0.18V. The amplitude represents the amount of charge converted to voltage with the electrical 
                    current amplifier. As can be seen, the blue LEDs produce the strongest optic signals.  
                    Table 7 shows the maximum bandwidth for the various receivers and attack models. The main 
                    factor in determining the maximum bandwidth in video cameras is the number of frames per 
                    second (FPS). For video cameras, we have identified a setting of two frames per bit as the 
                    optimal setting needed to achieve successful detection of the LED-ON timing.  
                                           Table 7. Maximum bandwidth of different receivers 
                     Tested             Model                    Resolution         Max bandwidth
                      Camera/Sensor
                     Entry-level        Nikon D7100.             1920x1080 (video)   15 bit/s
                      DSLR             lens: Nikon18-140mm      1280x720 (60 fps 
                                        F3.5-5.6 ED VR           video)
                     High-end          SNCEB600                  1280 x 1024        15 bit/s
                      security camera  Network 720p/30fps HD 
                                        - Fixed Camera
                      Extreme camera   GoPro Hero5               4K - WVGA         100-120 bit/s 
                      Webcam (HD)       Microsoft LifeCam        1280x720 (video)  15 bit/s 
                     Smartphone         Samsung Galaxy S6        1920x1080 (video) 15-60 bit/s 
                      camera
                       Wearable            Google Glass Explorer      2528x1856           15 bit/s 
                        camera             Edition                    1280x 720 (video)
                       Photodiode          e.g.,                      -                   <4000 bit/s 
                        sensor             SIEMENS photodiode 
                                           SFH-2030 / 
                                           Thorlabs PDA100A 
                                           sensor  
                       
                      C.  Distances 
                      It is known that the activity of computer LEDs can be detected from more than 30 meters away 
                      [27]. In fact, in LED to LED communication, given a line of sight with the transmitter it is 
                      possible to detect the LED transmission from even farther away [41]. The quality of the optical 
                      LED signal (as received by the camera) is affected by the receiver’s location (its distance away, 
                      angle, and position), the ambient light, LED wavelength, and other factors. Comprehensive 
                      analysis of optical signals is a complex task which goes beyond the scope of this paper. Notably, 
                      the environmental conditions can directly influence the effective distance. For example, during 
                                                  a
                      the night we were able identify the LED signals from outside the building, at a distance of 20 
                      meters away. In addition, using optical zoom lenses it is possible to extend the range further. 
                      Figure 8 shows the signals transmitted from PC-1 as measured in daylight by an optical sensor 
                      within the room at distances of three, four, and five meters away. The amplitudes represents the 
                      amount of charge converted to voltage with the current amplifier. 
                                      a
                                      b
                                      c
                                                                                                                    
                      Figure 8. Signals transmitted from PC-1 as measured in daylight by an optical sensor within the room at 
                      distances of (a) three, (b) four, and (c) five meters away. The amplitude represents the amount of charge 
                      converted to voltage with the current amplifier. 
                       
                                                          VII.  COUNTERMEASURES 
                      Countermeasures for emanation-based data leakage, can be classified into procedural and 
                      technological  countermeasures.  Procedural  countermeasures  may  include  organizational 
                    practices aimed to restrict the accessibility of sensitive computers by placing them in secured 
                    rooms where only authorized staff may access them; typically, all types of cameras are banned 
                    from such secured rooms. Some of the NATO standards concerning TEMPEST have been 
                    leaked or released [51] [52], and these standards define that certified equipment is classified by 
                    zones which refer to the perimeter that needs to be controlled to prevent signal leakage [53]. In 
                    these areas, the presence of surveillance cameras may serve as a deterrence measure. However, 
                    as  mentioned  previously  in  the  attack  model,  the  surveillance  camera  itself  may  be 
                    compromised by a malware [54] [39]. A less sophisticated countermeasure against LED attacks 
                    is to disconnect the HDD indication LED or cover it with black tape [27]. Equipment shielding 
                    is another commonly recommended by TEMPEST standards. In the case of optical emanation, 
                    a special window film that prevents optical eavesdropping may be installed [55]; note that this 
                    type  of  countermeasure  doesn't  protect  against  cameras  located  within  the  building. 
                    Technological countermeasures may include the detection of the presence of malware that 
                    triggers the HDD activity LED. However, practical implementation of such countermeasures 
                    appears to be nontrivial, since the read operation used for the LED control is commonly used 
                    by  many  processes  running  in  the  computer.  Another  possible  countermeasure  is  video 
                    monitoring the computer’s front panel in order to detect hidden signaling patterns. Again, 
                    practical implementation is nontrivial, because the HDD LED routinely blinks frequently due 
                    to read and write operations triggered by benign processes. Another interesting solution is to 
                    execute a background process that frequently invokes random read and write operations; that 
                    way, the signal generated by the malicious process will get mixed up with a random noise, 
                    limiting the attack’s effectiveness. The list of countermeasures is summarized in Table 8. 
                                                    Table 8. List of countermeasures 
                      Type             Countermeasure                                    Cost 
                      Procedural       Camera banning                                    Low 
                      Procedural       LED covering                                      Low 
                      Procedural       LED disconnecting                                 Low 
                      Procedural       Window shielding                                  High 
                      Technological    LED activity monitoring (software)                Low 
                      Technological    LED activity monitoring (camera)                  High 
                      Technological    Signal jamming (software)                         Low 
                     
                                                         VIII.  CONCLUSION 
                    We present a new method to leak data from air-gapped computers. Our method uses the HDD 
                    activity LED which is present in most PC workstations, laptops, and servers today. We show 
                    how the malware can indirectly control the status of the LED, turning it on and off for a 
                    specified amount of time, by invoking hard drive’s 'read' and 'write' operations. Our method is 
                    unique in two respects: it is covert and fast. It is covert, because the HDD activity LED routinely 
                    blinks frequently; hence, additional blinks caused by the attack may raise no suspicions. In 
                    terms of speed, our evaluation shows that the LED is capable of almost 6000 blinks per second, 
                    which enables a transmission rate of up to 4000 bit/s. This is 10 times faster than other air-gap 
                    covert channels relying on optical emissions. We examine the physical characteristics of HDD 
                    LEDs of different colors (red, blue, and white) and tested remote cameras, extreme cameras, 
                    security cameras, smartphone cameras, drone cameras, and optical sensors. Our results show 
                    that it is feasible to use this optical channel to efficiently leak different types of data (passwords, 
                    encryption keys, and files) from an air-gapped computer, via the HDD indication LED. 
                     
                                                          IX.   REFERENCES 
                                                                                                               
                           [1]     Federation of American Scientists , [Online]. Available: 
                                   http://fas.org/irp/program/disseminate/jwics.htm. 
                           [2]     MCAFEE, "Defending Critical Infrastructure Without Air Gaps And Stopgap Security," 
                                   Aug 2015. [Online]. Available: https://blogs.mcafee.com/executive-
                                   perspectives/defending-critical-infrastructure-without-air-gaps-stopgap-security/. 
                           [3]     S. Karnouskos, "Stuxnet worm impact on industrial cyber-physical system security," in 
                                   IECON 2011-37th Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2011.  
                           [4]     SECURELIST, "Agent.btz: a Source of Inspiration?," 2014. [Online]. Available: 
                                   https://securelist.com/blog/virus-watch/58551/agent-btz-a-source-of-inspiration/. 
                           [5]     B. Knowlton, "Military Computer Attack Confirmed," 2010. [Online]. Available: 
                                   http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/26/technology/26cyber.html?_r=2&adxnnl=1&re
                                   f=technology&adxnnlx=1423562532-hJL+Kot1FP3OEURLF9hjDw. 
                           [6]     D. Goodin and K. E. Group, "How “omnipotent” hackers tied to NSA hid for 14 years—
                                   and were found at last," ars technica, 2015. 
                           [7]     ICS-CERT, "malware infections in the conrol environment," 2012. 
                           [8]     S. Stasiukonis, "social-engineering-the-usb-way," 2006. [Online]. Available: 
                                   http://www.darkreading.com/attacks-breaches/social-engineering-the-usb-way/d/d-
                                   id/1128081?. 
                           [9]     G. Mordechai, G. Kedma, A. Kachlon and Y. Elovici, "AirHopper: Bridging the air-gap 
                                   between isolated networks and mobile phones using radio frequencies," in Malicious 
                                   and Unwanted Software: The Americas (MALWARE), 2014 9th International 
                                   Conference on, IEEE, 2014, pp. 58-67. 
                           [10]   M. G. Kuhn and R. J. Anderson, "Soft Tempest: Hidden data transmission using 
                                   electromagnetic emanations," in Information hiding, Springer-Verlag, 1998, pp. 124-
                                   142. 
                           [11]   M. G. Kuhn, "Compromising emanations: Eavesdropping risks of computer displays," 
                                   University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory, 2003. 
                           [12]   M. Vuagnoux and S. Pasini, "Compromising Electromagnetic Emanations of Wired and 
                                   Wireless Keyboards," in USENIX security symposium, 2009.  
                           [13]   M. Guri, A. Kachlon, O. Hasson, G. Kedma, Y. Mirsky and Y. Elovici, "GSMem: Data 
                                   Exfiltration from Air-Gapped Computers over GSM Frequencies," Washington, D.C., 
                                   2015.  
                           [14]   M. Hanspach and M. Goetz, "On Covert Acoustical Mesh Networks in Air.," Journal of 
                                   Communications, vol. 8, 2013.  
         [15]   T. Halevi and N. Saxena, "A closer look at keyboard acoustic emanations: random 
           passwords, typing styles and decoding techniques," in ACM Symposium on 
           Information, Computer and Communications Security, 2012.  
         [16]   M. Guri, M. Monitz, Y. Mirski and Y. Elovici, "BitWhisper: Covert Signaling Channel 
           between Air-Gapped Computers using Thermal Manipulations," in Computer Security 
           Foundations Symposium (CSF), 2015 IEEE 28th, 2015.  
         [17]   "Flicker fusion threshold," [Online]. Available: 
           https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flicker_fusion_threshold. 
         [18]   funtenna. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/funtenna. 
         [19]   N. Matyunin, J. Szefer, S. Biedermann and S. Katzenbeisser, "Covert channels using 
           mobile device's magnetic field sensors," in 2016 21st Asia and South Pacific Design 
           Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), 2016.  
         [20]   C. KASMI, J. L. ESTEVES and P. VALEMBOIS, "Air-gap Limitations and Bypass 
           Techniques: “Command and Control” using Smart Electromagnetic Interferences," in 
           Botconf, 2015.  
         [21]   M. a. G. M. Hanspach, "On Covert Acoustical Mesh Networks in Air," arXiv preprint 
           arXiv:1406.1213, 2014.  
         [22]   V. T. M. t. C. A.-G. S. f. P. N. Attack, "Eunchong Lee; Hyunsoo Kim; Ji Won Yoon," 
           Information Security Applications, vol. 9503, pp. 187-199, 2015.  
         [23]   S. J. O’Malley and K.-K. R. Choo, "Bridging the Air Gap: Inaudible Data Exfiltration by 
           Insiders," in Americas Conference on Information Systems, 2014.  
         [24]   M. Guri, Y. Solewicz, A. Daidakulov and Y. Elovici, "Fansmitter: Acoustic Data 
           Exfiltration from (Speakerless) Air-Gapped Computers," in arXiv:1606.05915, 2016.  
         [25]   M. Guri, Y. Solewicz, A. Daidakulov and Y. Elovici, "DiskFiltration: Data Exfiltration 
           from Speakerless Air-Gapped Computers via Covert Hard Drive Noise," in 
           arXiv:1608.03431, 2016.  
         [26]   M. Guri, G. Kedma, A. Kachlon and Y. Elovici, "AirHopper: Bridging the Air-Gap 
           between Isolated Networks and Mobile Phones using Radio Frequencies," in 9th IEEE 
           International Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MALCON 2014), 
           Puero Rico, Fajardo, 2014.  
         [27]   J. Loughry and A. D. Umphress, "Information leakage from optical emanations," ACM 
           Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC), vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 262-289, 
           2002.  
         [28]   V. Sepetnitsky, M. Guri and Y. Elovici:, "Exfiltration of Information from Air-Gapped 
           Machines Using Monitor's LED Indicator," in Joint Intelligence & Security Informatics 
           Conference (JISIC-2014) , 2014.  
         [29]   S. G. SC Magazine UK, "Light-based printer attack overcomes air-gapped computer 
           security," 17 Oct 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.scmagazineuk.com/light-
           based-printer-attack-overcomes-air-gapped-computer-security/article/377837/. 
           [Accessed 08 Nov 2015]. 
         [30]   A. C. Lopes and D. F. Aranha, "Platform-agnostic low-intrusion optical data 
           exfiltration," in Conference: 3rd International Conference on Information Systems 
           Security and Privacy (ICISSP 2017), Porto, 2016.  
         [31]   S. Griffith, "How to make a computer screen INVISIBLE," dailymail, Oct 2013. [Online]. 
           Available: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2480089/How-make-
           screen-INVISIBLE-Scientist-shows-make-monitor-blank-using-3D-glasses.html. 
           [Accessed May 2016]. 
         [32]   M. Guri, O. Hasson, G. Kedma and Y. Elovici, "VisiSploit: An Optical Covert-Channel," 
           in arXiv:1607.03946 [cs.CR], 2016.  
         [33]   L. Deshotels, "Inaudible Sound as a Covert Channel in Mobile Devices," in USENIX 
           Workshop for Offensive Technologies, 2014.  
         [34]   A. Gostev, "Agent.btz: a Source of Inspiration?," SecureList, 12 3 2014. [Online]. 
           Available: http://securelist.com/blog/virus-watch/58551/agent-btz-a-source-of-
           inspiration/. 
         [35]   GReAT team, "A Fanny Equation: "I am your father, Stuxnet"," Kaspersky Labs' Global 
           Research & Analysis Team, 17 2 2015. [Online]. Available: 
           https://securelist.com/blog/research/68787/a-fanny-equation-i-am-your-father-
           stuxnet/. 
         [36]   D. Goodin, "Meet “badBIOS,” the mysterious Mac and PC malware that jumps 
           airgaps," ars technica, 31 10 2013. [Online]. Available: 
           http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/10/meet-badbios-the-mysterious-mac-and-pc-
           malware-that-jumps-airgaps/. 
         [37]   TripWire, Irfhan Khimji, "The Malicious Insider," Mar 2015. [Online]. Available: 
           http://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/security-awareness/the-malicious-
           insider/. [Accessed 09 May 2016]. 
         [38]   TechTarget, "evil maid attack," [Online]. Available: 
           http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/evil-maid-attack. 
         [39]   A. Costin, "Security of CCTV and Video Surveillance Systems: Threats, Vulnerabilities, 
           Attacks, and Mitigations," in TrustED '16 Proceedings of the 6th International 
           Workshop on Trustworthy Embedded Devices, New York, 2016.  
         [40]   S. Schmid, G. Corbellini, S. Mangold and T. R. Gross, "An LED-to-LED Visible Light 
           Communication System with Software-Based Synchronization," [Online]. Available: 
           http://www.bu.edu/smartlighting/files/2012/10/Schmid_.pdf. 
         [41]   D. Giustiniano, N. O. Tippenhauer and S. Mangold, "Low-complexity Visible Light 
           Networking with LED-to-LED communication," in Wireless Days (WD), 2012 IFIP, 
           2012.  
         [42]   phys.org, "Siemens Sets New Record for Wireless Data Transfer using White LEDs," 21 
           Jan 2010. [Online]. Available: https://phys.org/news/2010-01-siemens-wireless-
           white.html. [Accessed 30 Jan 2017]. 
         [43]   L. P. Manual. [Online]. Available: http://man7.org/linux/man-
           pages/man3/fseek.3.html. 
         [44]   P. P. Manual. [Online]. Available: http://man7.org/linux/man-
           pages/man3/fopen.3p.html. 
         [45]   "(Unix), dd," [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dd_(Unix). [Accessed 
           01 07 2016]. 
         [46]   "sourceforge.net," 17 06 2015. [Online]. Available: 
           https://sourceforge.net/projects/hdparm/. [Accessed 01 07 2016]. 
         [47]   [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visible_light_communication. 
         [48]   [Online]. Available: http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-
           documentation/data-sheets/AD549.pdf. 
         [49]   [Online]. Available: http://sine.ni.com/nips/cds/view/p/lang/en/nid/209139. 
         [50]   [Online]. Available: 
           https://www.thorlabs.com/thorproduct.cfm?partnumber=PDA100A. 
         [51]   J. McNamara, "The Complete, Unofficial TEMPEST Information Page," 1999. [Online]. 
           Available: http://www.jammed.com/~jwa/tempest.html. [Accessed 4 Nov 2016]. 
         [52]   USAF, "AFSSI 7700: Communications and information emission security," Secretary of 
           the Air Force, 2007. 
         [53]   R. J. Anderson, "Emission security," in Security Engineering, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
           Publishing, Inc., 2008, pp. 523-546. 
         [54]   ZDNET, "Surveillance cameras sold on Amazon infected with malware," Apr 2016. 
           [Online]. Available: http://www.zdnet.com/article/amazon-surveillance-cameras-
           infected-with-malware/. [Accessed Jan 2017]. 
         [55]   [Online]. Available: https://www.signalsdefense.com/products. 
         [56]   Red Hat, "Direct I/O," Red Hat, [Online]. Available: 
           https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-
           US/Red_Hat_Enterprise_Linux/5/html/Global_File_System/s1-manage-direct-io.html. 
           [Accessed 01 07 2016]. 
         [57]   MSDN, "CreateFile function," [Online]. Available: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
           us/library/windows/desktop/aa363858(v=vs.85).aspx. 
          
                                               
          
          
          
