                                      LEAFLET RM1 
                          MARRIAGE IN SCOTLAND 
         
         
         •By law both parties to a proposed civil, religious or belief marriage are required to submit 
          marriage notice forms to the registrar of the district in which the marriage is to take place 
          informing them of their intention to marry. 
         
         •Forms for giving notice can be obtained from any registrar of births etc. in Scotland or from 
          the National Records of Scotland website at www.nrscotland.gov.uk . 
         
         •Notice must be given in the three-month period prior to the date of the marriage and 
          NOT LATER than 29 days before that date. 
         
         
         
         
          This leaflet gives general guidance only and should not be treated as a complete and 
          authoritative statement of the law.  If, after reading it, you are still in doubt you should seek 
          advice from any registrar of births etc. in Scotland or from staff in 
               Marriage/Civil Partnership Section of the National Records of Scotland (NRS), 
                                    New Register House, 
                                    Edinburgh EH1 3YT 
                              - email: marriage@nrscotland.gov.uk 
         
         
         
         
         WHO CAN BE MARRIED IN SCOTLAND? 
         
         Any two persons, regardless of sex or where they live, may marry in Scotland provided that: 
         
         •Both persons are at least 16 years of age on the day of their marriage. 
         
         •They are not related to one another in a way which would prevent their marrying (see the 
          list at Page 6 of this leaflet). 
         
         •They are unmarried and not in a civil partnership*. 
         
         •They are capable of understanding the nature of a marriage ceremony and of consenting to 
          marrying. 
         
         •In the case of an opposite sex marriage, the marriage would be regarded as valid in the 
          party’s country of domicile. 
         
         * If you are in a qualifying civil partnership you can change it to a marriage – a qualifying civil 
          partnership is a civil partnership which was registered in Scotland, England, Wales 
          or Northern Ireland and has not been dissolved, annulled or ended by death or an overseas 
          relationship registered outwith the United Kingdom which is treated as a civil partnership in 
          Scotland and has not been dissolved, annulled or ended by death. 
                                                                            Feb 2017 
                                          TYPES OF MARRIAGE 
                                       
                                          You can be married in either of two ways in Scotland - by a religious or belief ceremony or by 
                                          a civil ceremony: 
                                       
                                         •A religious or belief marriage may take place anywhere and may be solemnised only by a 
                                              minister, clergyman, pastor, priest or other person approved to do so under the 
                                              Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977. 
                                       
                                         •A civil marriage may take place in a registration office or at any place agreed between the 
                                              registration authority and the couple and may be solemnised only by a registrar or an 
                                              assistant registrar who has been authorised by the Registrar General for that purpose. 
                                       
                                          HOW AND WHEN TO GIVE NOTICE 
                                       
                                          You can each obtain a marriage notice form, and information about fees, from any registrar 
                                          of births etc. in Scotland. In most cases you can get the address of your local registrar from 
                                          the telephone directory. A list of registrars is also available on the NRS website at 
                                          www.nrscotland.gov.uk/files/registration/reglist.pdf. 
                                       
                                          •Each of you must complete and submit a marriage notice, along with the required 
                                              documents (see below) and the appropriate fee, to the registrar for the district in which 
                                              the marriage is to take place.  This means that both parties must be aware of the 
                                              marriage and independently complete and sign the declaration on the marriage notice form. 
                                              Failing to give proper notice can result in a marriage being postponed or prevented from 
                                              proceeding. 
                                       
                                          •Timing is important.  The notices must be submitted early enough to enable the registrar to 
                                              satisfy themself that you are free to marry one another.  Normally notices should be in their 
                                              hands about TEN to TWELVE weeks beforehand. The minimum period is 29 days before 
                                              the date of the proposed marriage, but if you leave things as late as this you could be 
                                              faced with the need to postpone your marriage. 
                                       
                                          •Only in exceptional circumstances will the Registrar General authorise a marriage to take 
                                              place if 29 days' notice has not been given. 
                                       
                                          •Although you need not both attend personally at the registrar's office to hand in your 
                                              marriage notice, at least one of you may be asked to attend there personally before the 
                                              date of the marriage.  This is necessary, in the case of a religious or belief marriage, to 
                                              collect the Marriage Schedule (see page 4) or, it might be necessary in the case of a civil 
                                              marriage, to finalise arrangements with the registrar. 
                                       
                                          •Every person giving notice is required to sign a declaration to the effect that the particulars 
                                              and information given on the notice are correct.  As a safeguard against bigamous 
                                              marriages a subsequent check of the information is made by NRS. 
                                       
                                          •Persons related in any of the ways listed at paragraph 2 at the end of this leaflet will each 
                                              require to sign a separate declaration form which, like the marriage notice form, is 
                                              obtainable from any registrar of births etc. in Scotland. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feb 2017 
                                          IF YOU LIVE IN ENGLAND OR WALES 
                                       
                                          •As an alternative to the normal procedure of giving notice to a registrar in Scotland, if you 
                                          intend to marry 
                                       
                                              (i)  a person residing in Scotland, or 
                                              (ii) a person residing in England or Wales who has a parent residing in Scotland, you may 
                                                          give notice of marriage to the superintendent registrar in the district of England or Wales 
                                                          in which you reside. The person you are marrying should, however, give notice in 
                                                          Scotland in the usual way. 
                                       
                                         •You should seek the advice of the superintendent registrar if you wish to proceed in this 
                                                way.  The certificate for marriage obtained from him should be sent to the Scottish registrar 
                                                as quickly as possible. 
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          DOCUMENTS TO BE PRODUCED 
                                       
                                          When giving or sending the marriage notice forms to the registrar each of you must supply 
                                          the following: 
                                       
                                          •Your birth certificate or, if you are adopted, your adoption certificate. 
                                       
                                          •Evidence of your usual residence. 
                                       
                                          •If you have been married or in a registered civil partnership before and the marriage or civil 
                                              partnership has been dissolved or annulled, a decree of divorce or dissolution or annulment 
                                              or a certified copy decree. A decree of divorce or dissolution granted outwith Scotland must 
                                              be absolute or final - a decree nisi is not acceptable. 
                                       
                                          •The registrar will ask to see your valid passport or other document to provide evidence of 
                                              your nationality. 
                                       
                                         •If your spouse or civil partner is deceased, the death certificate of your former spouse or 
                                              civil partner. 
                                       
                                          •If you are in a qualifying civil partnership, an extract from the entry in the civil partnership 
                                          register relating to the civil partnership. 
                                       
                                          •If you are in an existing marriage, your marriage certificate. 
                                       
                                         •If your domicile is abroad, a certificate of no impediment issued by the competent authority 
                                              to the effect that you are free to marry - see IF YOU ARE DOMICILED OUTSIDE THE 
                                              UNITED KINGDOM (below). 
                                       
                                         •If any of these documents are in a language other than English, a certified translation in 
                                              English must also be provided. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feb 2017 
                                    •Do not delay giving notice simply because you are waiting for any of the documents 
                                        mentioned above to come to hand.  If time is getting short it is better to give notice first and 
                                        then pass the documents to the registrar when they become available; but they must be 
                                        made available to the registrar before the marriage.  Provided the documents are in order, 
                                        the marriage can proceed as arranged. 
                                 
                                    If you are subject to immigration controls you will have to provide extra documentation to that 
                                    outlined above.  In particular, you will need to provide a Declaration of Immigration Status 
                                    form which can be obtained from the registrar or the NRS website.  Evidence to support the 
                                    statement you make on the Declaration of Immigration Status form will also be required.  If 
                                    you are in any doubt about what is required, or if you need further information, you should 
                                    consult the registrar or contact NRS. 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    IF YOU ARE DOMICILED OUTSIDE THE UNITED KINGDOM 
                                 
                                    The normal procedure of giving notice to the registrar in Scotland must be followed but, as 
                                    previously mentioned, an additional requirement is placed upon you. 
                                 
                                    •If, being domiciled in a country outside the UK, you are subject to the marriage laws of that 
                                       country, you should obtain, if practicable, a certificate issued by the competent authority 
                                       (usually the civil authority) in that country to the effect that there is no impediment to your 
                                       proposed marriage.  If the certificate is in a language other than English you should also 
                                       produce a certified translation. 
                                 
                                    •In the absence of such a certificate without good reason being shown, it may not be 
                                       possible for you to marry in Scotland. 
                                 
                                    •If you are now resident in the UK, and have lived here for the last two years or more, you 
                                       need not submit such a certificate. 
                                 
                                    •If you are a UK citizen living abroad, or an Australian or New Zealand or Canadian or 
                                       United States of America citizen you need not submit such a certificate. 
                                 
                                    •If you are in any doubt about what is required, or if you need further information, you should 
                                       consult the registrar or write to NRS at the address shown at the start of this leaflet. 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    MAKING ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE MARRIAGE CEREMONY 
                                 
                                    It is important to make early arrangements for the date and time of your marriage. 
                                 
                                    •If you are having a religious or belief ceremony, contact the person performing the marriage 
                                       before completing the notice of marriage. 
                                 
                                    •For a civil marriage, make advance arrangements with the registrar. This is particularly 
                                       important if the ceremony is to be in towns and cities, where large numbers of people want 
                                       to be married at certain times of the year. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feb 2017 
            •Arrange for two persons, aged 16 years or over, to be present at your marriage to act as 
             witnesses. They are required whether it is a religious or belief or civil ceremony. 
            
            •Be sure to let the person performing the marriage know if you change your plans or decide 
             to postpone your marriage. 
            
            
            
            THE MARRIAGE SCHEDULE 
            
            When they are satisfied there is no legal impediment to the marriage, the registrar will 
            prepare a Marriage Schedule from the information you have given them.  The Schedule is a 
            most important document - no marriage can proceed without it. 
            
            •If you are having a religious or belief marriage  the Marriage Schedule will be issued to you 
             by the registrar.  The Schedule cannot be issued more than seven days before the marriage 
             and the registrar will advise you when to call to collect it.  The Schedule cannot be collected 
             on your behalf by a relative or friend - the registrar will issue it only to one of the parties to 
             the marriage. 
            
            •The Marriage Schedule must be produced before the marriage ceremony to the person 
             performing the marriage. 
            
            •Immediately after the ceremony, the Schedule must be signed in black fountain pen by both 
             parties, by the person performing the marriage and by the two witnesses.  Thereafter, it 
             must be returned to the registrar within three days so that (s)he can register the marriage. 
            
            •If you are having a civil marriage, a Marriage Schedule will not be issued, but the registrar 
             will have it available at the marriage ceremony for signature.  Subsequently, the registrar 
             will register the marriage. 
            
            •A fee for the civil marriage and, if applicable, for the attendance of an authorised registrar if 
             the location is somewhere other than the registration office, is payable to the registrar in 
             advance. 
            
            
            
            MARRIAGE CERTIFICATE 
            
            After the marriage has been registered, you can obtain copies of the marriage certificate 
            from the registrar on payment of the appropriate fee. 
            
            
            
            DEGREES OF RELATIONSHIP WITHIN WHICH MARRIAGE IS UNLAWFUL 
            
            
            
            
            See Page 6 of this leaflet. 
                                                                                                      Feb 2017 
                                          DEGREES OF RELATIONSHIP WITHIN WHICH MARRIAGE IS UNLAWFUL 
                                       
                                                 1. Relationships by consanguinity 
                                       
                                                Parent 
                                                Child 
                                                Grandparent 
                                                Grandchild 
                                                Sibling 
                                                Aunt or uncle 
                                                Niece or nephew 
                                                Great-grandparent 
                                                Great-grandchild 
                                       
                                                 2. Relationships by affinity – see note below 
                                       
                                                Child of former spouse 
                                                Child of former civil partner 
                                                Former spouse of parent 
                                                Former civil partner of parent 
                                                Former spouse of grandparent 
                                                Former civil partner of grandparent 
                                                Grandchild of former spouse 
                                                Grandchild of former civil partner 
                                       
                                                3. Relationships by adoption 
                                       
                                                Adoptive parent or former adoptive parent 
                                                Adopted child or former adopted child 
                                       
                                          Note: Parties related within the degrees listed at 2 can marry if both are 21 years of age or 
                                          over at the time of the marriage and the younger party has not, before his or her 18th 
                                          birthday, lived in the same household as the other party and been treated by that person as a 
                                          child of the family. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feb 2017 
