                                                                                                                    
                 
                Section I: Background, approach and rationale 
                Introduction 
                About the EU Pledge 
                The EU Pledge is a voluntary initiative by leading food and beverage companies to change food and 
                beverage advertising to children under the age of twelve on TV, print and internet in the European 
                Union. 
                The EU Pledge was launched in December 2007 as part of the signatories’ commitment to the 
                European Union Platform for Action on Diet, Physical Activity and Health, the multi-stakeholder 
                forum set up by former EU Health and Consumer Affairs Commissioner Markos Kyprianou in 2005 to 
                encourage stakeholders to take initiatives aimed at promoting healthy lifestyles in Europe. In the 
                context  of  the  EU  Platform,  the  EU  Pledge  commitment  is  owned  by  the  World  Federation  of 
                Advertisers (WFA), which also supports the programme.  
                EU Pledge members 
                The  founding  members of the EU Pledge are the following companies: Burger King, Coca-Cola, 
                Danone, Ferrero, General Mills, Kellogg, Kraft Foods, Mars, Nestlé, PepsiCo and Unilever. 
                In 2010, the European Snacks Association (ESA) and its leading corporate members joined the EU 
                Pledge. Today, those are: Intersnack (including Estrella Maarud acquired in May 2014), KiMs (owned 
                by Orkla Confectionery and Snacks), Lorenz Snack-World, Unichips San Carlo, Zweifel Pomy-Chips 
                and Amica Chips (which joined in July 2014).  
                McDonald’s joined the EU Pledge in November 2011, Royal FrieslandCampina in 2012, the Bel Group 
                in  2016 and Arla Foods in 2017, bringing membership to twenty-one leading food and beverage 
                companies. Together, EU Pledge member companies account for over 80% of food and beverage 
                advertising spend in the EU. The initiative is open to any food and beverage company active in 
                Europe and willing to subscribe to the EU Pledge commitments. 
                The EU Pledge commitments 
                The EU Pledge is a framework initiative whereby signatories are committed to changing the way they 
                advertise to children under 12 years old by respecting the following two criteria: 
                    •   No advertising of products to children under 12 years, except for products which fulfil 
                        specific nutrition criteria based on accepted scientific evidence and/or applicable national 
                        and international  dietary  guidelines.  For  the  purpose  of  this  initiative,  “advertising  to 
                        children under 12 years” was defined as advertising to media audiences with a minimum 
                               7                          8
                        of 35%  of children under 12 years . 
                                                                           
                7
                   This is a commonly agreed benchmark. This method of audience indexing has been agreed as a pragmatic system to 
                determine the applicability of advertising rules. Nevertheless, this is a minimum common benchmark for all EU Pledge 
                member companies. For further detail see: www.eu-pledge.eu 
                8
                  The rationale for this threshold is the strong degree of academic consensus that before the age of 12 children develop 
                their behaviour as consumers, effectively recognise advertising and are able to adopt critical attitudes towards it. Although 
                 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                     Page 11 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                       •   No  communication  related  to  products  in  primary  schools,  except  where  specifically 
                           requested by, or agreed with, the school administration for educational purposes. 
                  The EU Pledge is a dynamic and progressive initiative. While it provides a common framework, 
                  member companies can make commitments that go beyond it, and several do. Since its launch, over 
                  half of the founding member companies have  increased their corporate commitments, tightening 
                  the way they define advertising to children, broadening the scope of their actions and strengthening 
                  the nutrition criteria they use to classify better-for-you options for children under 12 years. 
                  In the same spirit and following constructive dialogue with stakeholders, the EU Pledge launched 
                  enhanced framework commitments, applying as of 1 January 2012 to existing and new members: 
                       •   The audience threshold of children under 12 years was lowered from 50% to 35% 
                       •   In  the online sphere, the above commitment applies to marketing communications for 
                           food  and  beverage  products  on  company-owned  websites,  in  addition  to  third-party 
                           internet advertising.  
                  These enhanced commitments are subject to third-party monitoring – as have been the original 
                  commitments - since their entry into force on 1 January 2012. 
                  In November 2014, EU Pledge member companies announced plans to extend the scope of the EU 
                  Pledge commitment to cover a number of additional media and to address the content of their 
                  marketing communications by the end of 2016:  
                  Extension of scope: Since 31 December 2016, the EU Pledge commitment also applies to radio, 
                  cinema, DVD/CD-ROM, direct marketing, product placement, interactive games, apps, mobile and 
                  SMS marketing.  
                  Addressing creative execution: The new policy ensures that where no reliable audience 
                  measurement data is available, advertisers consider not only the placement, but also the overall 
                  impression of the marketing communication, to ensure that if the product in question does not meet 
                                                                                                                             9
                  the common nutrition criteria, the communication is not designed to appeal primarily to children .                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                  children between the ages of 6 and 11 generally understand the persuasive intent of advertising, care should be taken 
                  because, toward the younger end of that age range, they may not have a fully developed critical understanding. 
                  9
                    Further information about the enhanced commitments can be found here: http://www.eu-pledge.eu/content/ enhanced-
                  2014-commitments  
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 12 
                   
                                                                                                                      
                 
                Current practice 
                The EU Pledge White Paper was the first set of nutritional guidelines to evaluate products on the 
                basis of their nutrient content in the EU.  The EU Pledge criteria were created using international and 
                national  recommendations  for  total  diets  (e.g.  WHO  2003,  Eurodiet  2001,  Standing  Nordic 
                Committee on Food 2004, Conseil Supérieur d’Hygiène 2006). Such dietary guidelines usually include 
                recommendations on daily caloric/nutritional intake. Alternatively many countries have food-based 
                dietary guidelines to communicate healthy dietary choices in terms of food groups (e.g. AFSSA 2009, 
                DGE 2005, HMH 2009, MFF 2009, MHH 2001, NNC 2005, SACN 2011, VIG 2009; see also WH0 2003 
                bis); however, these are not specific to individual foods. Existing guidelines are also rarely adapted to 
                children’s dietary intakes. 
                                                    10
                A number of EU Pledge companies  have developed their own nutrition criteria for the purpose of 
                distinguishing better-for-you options for children under 12 years. Such criteria have been developed 
                on the basis of the most widely accepted national and international guidelines that exist (e.g. WHO, 
                FAO, USDA, IOM, EURODIET). Companies that use nutrition guidelines to determine what they may 
                choose to advertise to children have developed them individually, reflecting the diversity of their 
                product portfolios. Some include products from a number of categories; others include only one 
                category. Eight EU Pledge member companies11 have taken the decision not to advertise any of their 
                products to children under 12, not on the basis of nutritional considerations, but because they direct 
                their advertising primarily to the adults who make the household purchasing decisions and to young 
                people older than 12 years. 
                Stakeholders have called on the EU Pledge initiative to enhance the transparency and consistency of 
                the nutrition criteria applied by companies. This call is reflected in the European Commission’s 2010 
                implementation  progress  report  on  the  EU  Strategy  on  Obesity,  overweight  and  related  health 
                conditions (European Commission 2010), as well as the Commission’s 2012 application report on the 
                Audiovisual Media Services Directive (European Commission 2012).  
                Development of common criteria 
                Common nutrition criteria have been developed by EU Pledge members that use nutrition guidelines 
                for  advertising  products  to  children  to  provide  increased  transparency  and  consistency  and 
                strengthen the commitments overall. 
                The common criteria developed by these EU Pledge members are designed for the exclusive purpose 
                of  defining  better-for-you  options  in  the  context  of  food  and  beverage  product  advertising  to 
                children  under  the  age  of  12  and  specifically  for  the  product  categories  covered.  This  reflects 
                international guidelines (e.g. EFSA 2008; WHO unpublished) underlining the necessity to develop 
                nutrient criteria that are tailored for a specific purpose.  
                Such  criteria  are  applied  only  by  EU  Pledge  members  who  choose  to  advertise  the  compliant 
                products also to children under 12. Companies that wish to use different nutrition criteria may 
                continue to do so, provided they can demonstrate that these are more stringent than the EU Pledge 
                common nutrition criteria. In such cases, the EU Pledge will commission an independent nutrition 
                                                                           
                10 Arla Foods, Bel Group, Burger King, Danone, FrieslandCampina, General Mills, Kellogg’s, Intersnack, McDonald’s, Nestlé, 
                PepsiCo, Unichips San-Carlo and Unilever 
                11 Amica Chips, Coca-Cola, KiMs, Lorenz Snack-World, Ferrero, Mars, Mondelez, Zweifel Pomy-Chip 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 13 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                  expert to verify that this is the case, on the basis of the impact of the criteria on the eligibility of 
                  those products for advertising to children under 12. 
                  The effort of the EU Pledge in this area should be seen against the backdrop of the great challenge of 
                  developing common criteria in the diverse countries that make up Europe. As underlined by EFSA, 
                  “the lack of uniform data for food composition and food consumption across the EU, as well as 
                  differences in nutrient intake recommendations and food based dietary guidelines between Member 
                  States, makes it more difficult to set nutrient profiles at EU level than at national level” (EFSA 2008). 
                  Against  this  background  it  is  clear  that  any  nutrition  criteria  will  have  their  advantages  and 
                  drawbacks and all systems will  have  inherent  limitations.  Such  limitations  common  to  different 
                  schemes include, according to EFSA: 
                       •   The difficulty in reflecting differences in national nutrient intake recommendations and food 
                           based dietary guidelines in an EU system. 
                       •   The  difficulty  in  “seeking  to  apply  to  individual  food  products  nutrient  intake 
                           recommendations that are established for the overall diet”.  
                       •   The inability of nutrient criteria to “take into account changes in nutrient content that occur 
                           during cooking or preparation, such as addition of fat, sugar or salt” as well as “the habitual 
                           intake of the food or the pattern of consumption”. (EFSA 2008) 
                  The  present  nutrition  criteria  were  designed  for  the  specific  and  exclusive  purpose  of  food 
                  advertising to children under 12; their use for other purposes, such as, for instance, for nutrition and 
                  health claims or taxation, would not be appropriate or scientifically credible. 
                  Development process 
                  The EU Pledge Working Group on Nutrition Criteria was established following discussions in the 
                  course of 2011 with the European Commission and stakeholders in the context of the EU Platform 
                  for Action on Diet, Physical Activity and Health.  
                  The Working Group, established in late 2011, drew on member companies’ internal expertise, by 
                  gathering a senior nutritionist from each member company. The Working Group established terms 
                  of reference aimed at developing a consensual approach to common nutrition criteria. 
                  In a first phase, the Working Group discussed how it would approach establishing a suitable process 
                  for developing common nutrition criteria. In this respect it relied to a significant extent on the draft 
                  WHO Guidance on the establishment of nutrient profiles (WHO unpublished). 
                  Second,  the  Working  Group  reviewed  the  available  evidence  and  existing  standards  that  could 
                  provide a useful benchmark (See Annex II, Reference documents).  
                  Third, the Working Group discussed and agreed on an overall conceptual approach that it deemed 
                  suitable  for  the  purpose  in  hand,  having  weighed  up  the  benefits  and  drawbacks  of  different 
                  approaches. 
                  Fourth, the Working Group discussed and agreed core parameters (scope, food categories, reference 
                  values, thresholds vs. scoring).  
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 14 
                   
                                                                                                                      
                 
                Fifth, the Working Group set about agreeing specific values and, in the process, refined the key 
                parameters where needed. 
                Finally,  the  resulting  draft  common  nutrition  criteria  were  subjected  to  a  preliminary  validation 
                process, involving benchmarking against indicator foods and against member companies’ product 
                portfolios; in a second stage they will also be reviewed against a wider European food consumption 
                database (Roodenburg et al. 2011 bis). 
                Overall approach 
                The EU Pledge Nutrition Working Group took on board the key points of the EFSA Opinion (EFSA 
                2008), namely the need to take into account:  
                    •   Dietary recommendations, public health considerations and generally accepted scientific 
                        evidence on the relationship between diet, nutrition and health; 
                    •   Other considerations of an industrial/commercial, cultural and dietary/culinary nature; 
                    •   The variability of dietary habits and traditions and the fact that dietary changes take time; 
                    •   The ability of the system to permit product innovation. 
                Based on this guidance, the EU Pledge Working Group developed some key principles to underpin its 
                work, namely that the criteria would be:  
                    •   Scientifically grounded: i.e. backed up by an articulated and up-to-date science-based 
                        analysis of state of the art evidence wherever possible. 
                    •   Comprehensive: i.e. applicable to all products in defined categories (see table on Nutrition 
                        criteria overview), unless exemptions are justified (a) scientifically, (b) by the fact that such 
                        categories/products are not currently marketed to children under 12 at all. 
                    •   Progressive: i.e. able to foster progress vis-à-vis existing company specific criteria and able 
                        to encourage product innovation and reformulation. 
                    •   Appropriate: i.e. suitable for the European context and compatible with standards 
                        developed elsewhere. 
                    •   Validated: i.e. amenable to a validation process ensuring quality and legitimacy (specifics to 
                        be determined at a later stage). 
                    •   Communicable: i.e. with a clear rationale and relatively straight-forward to communicate 
                        externally to lay audiences. 
                Different approaches to developing and applying nutrition criteria have been adopted across the 
                globe.  One  approach  is  not  necessarily  better  than  another  on  the  basis  of  the  above  criteria. 
                However, each system has specific advantages and disadvantages and, as noted above, all have 
                                     12
                inherent limitations.  
                On the basis of a comprehensive discussion informed by the available evidence and guidance13 and 
                underpinned by the above principles, the EU Pledge Working Group decided to favour a category-
                based  approach,  based  on  thresholds  for  key  nutrients,  on  the  basis  of  the  following  main 
                considerations: 
                                                                           
                12 For a detailed discussion, see EFSA 2008. 
                13 See Annex II for a list of key reference documents used. 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 15 
                 
                                                                                                                     
                 
                Category based approach 
                    •   A category-based approach is able to take into account the role that different types of food 
                        and beverage products play in the average diet, whereas this is significantly more difficult to 
                        achieve in an “across the board” or universal approach (EFSA 2008). 
                    •   A  category-based  approach  works  better  to  discriminate  between  food  products  within 
                        categories. It is therefore better suited than a universal system to further the core aim of the 
                        EU Pledge, namely to limit the types of food and beverage products that are advertised to 
                        children,  while  incentivising  competition  for  the  development  of  better-for-you  options, 
                        through innovation and reformulation. 
                Threshold-based approach 
                    •   As recommended by EFSA, the choice between threshold-based and scoring models should 
                        be guided by pragmatic considerations related to the specific needs of the system.14  
                    •   On this  basis,  the  EU  Pledge  Working  Group  considered  that  a  threshold-based  system 
                        would be more appropriate, since: 
                            o  A  key  driver  of  establishing  common  nutrition  criteria  was  to  enhance  the 
                                consistency  of  existing  company-specific  criteria,  most  of  which  were  based  on 
                                threshold systems; 
                            o  Another key driver was increased transparency, and a threshold system is more 
                                transparent and easier to communicate to stakeholders and to the consumer than a 
                                scoring  system,  whereby  nutritional  scores  are  worked  out  on  the  basis  of  an 
                                algorithm. 
                                                 
                                                                           
                14 “The Panel recommends that the choice of threshold or scoring system should be based on pragmatic considerations 
                related to the needs of the particular scheme, while threshold or score values should be selected to ensure the appropriate 
                classification of food products” (EFSA 2008) 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                      Page 16 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                  Scope and product categories 
                  In defining product categories, the Working Group was guided by the following principles: 
                       •   The common nutrition criteria are not intended as a universally applicable system. They 
                           should cover defined categories produced or marketed by EU Pledge member companies, 
                           other  than  those  categories  produced  but  not  advertised  to  children  under  member 
                           companies’ corporate commitments.  
                       •   The number of categories should be limited as much as possible with a view to ensuring 
                           consistent  treatment  of  similar  products,  as  well  as  maintaining  as  much  simplicity  as 
                           possible. 
                       •   At  the  same  time,  the  number of  categories  should  not  be  limited  to  an  extent  where 
                           categories could be so broad as to require less stringent values in order to accommodate all 
                           types of products represented in the category. 
                  On this basis and at this stage, the following nine categories were developed and agreed: 
                       1.  Vegetable oils, butter and spreadable fats & emulsion-based sauces (e.g. mayonnaise) 
                                               15            16
                       2.  Fruits, vegetables  and seeds  and their products except oil  
                       3.  Meat based products 
                       4.  Fishery products 
                       5.  Dairy products 
                       6.  Cereal based products 
                       7.  Soups, composite dishes, main courses and filled sandwiches 
                       8.  Meals 
                       9.  Edible ices 
                  It became clear that in order to ensure both robustness and fairness, it would be necessary to create 
                  sub-categories within most of the above categories. These are detailed in Section II below. 
                  In  order to ensure that products would fit appropriately into one of the above categories, each 
                  category was defined on the basis of minimum content of the food group in question (e.g. min 50g 
                  meat/100g). In a couple of cases, the definition was based on “main ingredient” considerations 
                  instead. This is to account for the fact that in some categories it is common to have products that 
                  contain significant percentages of more than one food group without reaching a minimum threshold 
                  for either category (e.g. some cereal products). In order to fit into the most appropriate category, 
                  the “main ingredient” criterion is more suitable in these cases. 
                  No nutrition criteria were developed for the following categories that are not advertised to children 
                  under 12 by EU Pledge member companies: 
                       •   Sugar and sugar-based products, which  include: 
                                o  Chocolate or chocolate products 
                                o  Jam or marmalade 
                                                                                               17
                                o  Non-chocolate confectionery or other sugar products  
                                                                             
                  15 Vegetables include legumes as well as potatoes.  
                  16 Seeds include seeds, kernels and nuts. Nuts include peanuts and tree nuts. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 17 
                   
                                                                                                                     
                 
                            o  Sugar, honey or syrup 
                                   18
                    •   Soft drinks  
                This reflects existing commitments by several member companies active in these categories and it 
                confirms that none of the EU Pledge member companies will advertise these products to children 
                under 12, as defined in the EU Pledge commitments. 
                Reference units 
                As recommended by EFSA, the EU Pledge Working Group based its selection of reference units on 
                pragmatic considerations related to the needs of the particular scheme in question (EFSA 2008).  
                The  objective  of  the  present  scheme  is  to  differentiate  between  products  within  categories  – 
                products which are invariably pre-packed and promoted and sold in specific portion sizes or with 
                serving  size  instructions.  On  this  basis,  it  was  agreed  that  the  reference  unit  for  the  first  key 
                discriminating criterion, i.e. energy, should be “per portion”19. This would ensure that the absolute 
                energy value of a product would need to be below a specific cap to be eligible for advertising to 
                children under 12. 
                With regard to key nutrients, it was agreed that the reference unit would be “per 100g/ml”20. This is 
                because: 
                    •   Standardised reference portion sizes do not exist for all product categories in Europe. 
                    •   The nutrient values per 100g/ml can easily be translated into values per portion where 
                        standard reference portions exist. 
                Nutrients to limit 
                With regard to “nutrients to limit”, the EU Pledge Working Group reviewed the available evidence 
                (see  Annex  II),  with  the  following  EFSA  recommendation  as  a  guiding  principle:  “the  virtues  of 
                nutrient profiles based on a large number of nutrients should be weighed against the burden that 
                such complexity would constitute” (EFSA 2008). 
                The pragmatic decision taken by the Working Group was to focus on those nutrients that are most 
                widely considered of public health concern (WHO 2004) – not because inherently problematic – but 
                because population average intakes are in excess of those recommended or desirable for health. In 
                addition to energy, the “nutrients to limit” chosen were: 
                    •   Sodium 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                17 Sugar-free gum and sugar-free mints are exempted, i.e. outside the scope of EU Pledge restrictions. 
                18 The rationale for this exclusion is that currently some EU Pledge companies committed in 2006 not to market any soft 
                drinks directly to children younger than 12 years old (see UNESDA commitments here ). Discussions are ongoing regarding 
                low-energy beverages. In the meantime companies that are not signatories to the UNESDA commitment continue using 
                their own nutrition criteria for these beverages, including fruit-based drinks. Bottled water is exempted from the EU Pledge 
                restrictions. 
                19  Some exceptions to this rule were however needed, e.g. in the case of quick service restaurant meals, where the 
                reference value is “per meal”, as these are marketed as such, i.e. as a combination of main dish, side dish, dessert and 
                drink. 
                20 As above. An additional exception was needed in the case of saturated fats in some categories: where fat is a dominant 
                nutrient in the product, what matters more nutritionally is the proportion of saturated fat to total fat, rather than the total 
                amount of saturated fat per 100g. 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                      Page 18 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                       •   Saturated fat 
                       •   Total sugars 
                  The sodium values given can be converted into salt values by applying the standard conversion 
                  formula: salt value = 2.5 x sodium value. 
                  With regard to fat, the decision to focus mainly on saturated fats was taken on the basis of: 
                       •   The consideration that total fat content is already limited by an energy cap. 
                       •   The fact that saturated fat, not fat overall, is consumed in amounts that exceed those that 
                           are recommended for health. 
                       •   The understanding that trans-fatty acids have been reduced to minimal levels for most of 
                           the food groups in the European food supply in recent years, to the point where they are no 
                           longer of significant relevance as a “nutrient to limit” (EFSA 2008). 
                  Components to encourage 
                  The EU Pledge Working Group agreed that a system taking into account both “nutrients to limit” and 
                  “components to encourage” (nutrients and food groups) is more in line with the core objective of 
                  the EU Pledge – to foster innovation, reformulation and competition for a shift towards advertising 
                  of better-for-you products – than a system based solely on “nutrients to limit”.  
                  The choice of “components to encourage” was made on a category basis, i.e. pinpointing those 
                  positive  components  most  relevant  in  each  category,  e.g.  fibre  and  wholegrain  in  cereal-based 
                  products;  protein  and  calcium  in  dairy  products;  protein  in  meat  and  fishery  products;  poly-
                  unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in vegetable oils, spreads and fats, etc. 
                  In  addition,  it  was  decided  to only  allow  the  addition  of  vitamins  and minerals (fortification) to 
                  qualify as “components to encourage” in specific food categories where such fortification is most 
                  strongly encouraged on public health grounds (e.g. vitamin D in dairy products). In all other cases, 
                  only naturally occurring “components to encourage” qualify. 
                  Importantly,  and  in  contrast  to  a  scoring  system,  in  the  EU  Pledge  common  nutrition  criteria, 
                  “components to encourage” do not counterbalance “nutrients to limit”. Where they are listed in the 
                  criteria, the specified quantity needs to be present in the product in addition to the product meeting 
                  the criteria for “nutrients to limit”.  
                  Nutrient values 
                  All values referring to energy, “nutrients to limit” and “components to encourage” in the EU Pledge 
                  common nutrition criteria apply to food products as sold, except where specified, for those products 
                  which cannot be consumed without reconstitution (e.g. soup powder, dehydrated mashed potatoes, 
                  milk drinks etc.). 
                  The values for each nutrient in each category are based on: 
                       •   International dietary guidelines referring to nutrient intake (e.g. WHO). 
                       •   The  contribution  of  different  foods  to  children’s  overall  diet,  on  the  basis  of  average 
                           consumption. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 19 
                   
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                       •   The  overall  importance  of  specific  nutrients  in  food  products  within  each  category,  i.e. 
                           benchmarking of what are higher or lower end percentages. 
                       •   Technological feasibility and consumer acceptance. 
                  With regards to energy values, these are calculated as a percentage of reference intake values. It is 
                  important to note that quantitative guidelines for children are not numerous. Nutritional needs for 
                  children below 12 are not always adequately researched, especially when they are not clearly linked 
                  to a risk of obesity and chronic diseases. Currently there are no officially approved or EU-endorsed 
                  daily reference values for children available in Europe. When the EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper 
                  was first adopted there was no officially approved or EU-endorsed daily reference value for children 
                  available in Europe. We therefore based our approach on existing reference intake values in the US 
                  and some European countries (See Annex I). We found that reference intakes for 4 to 10 year olds 
                  ranged from about 1400kcal to over 2050 kcal so the chosen value of 1700 kcal/day for children up 
                  to 12 years of age is conservative but justifiably so in light of the overall public policy objective of 
                  tackling childhood obesity. Since then, EFSA adopted a scientific opinion on references values for 
                  energy which sets reference intakes for 4 to 11 years old with moderate physical activity level (PAL) 
                  1.6  from  1335kcal  to  2043kcal.  The  chosen  value  of  1700kcal/day  is  still  valid  and  roughly 
                  corresponds to the average of those values. 
                  Food  intake  during  the  day  is  usually  divided  across:  breakfast,  lunch,  evening  meal  and  food 
                  consumed between meals (snacks). As a wider range of foods is customarily consumed at lunch and 
                  dinner compared to breakfast, these are conventionally assigned a greater proportion of intake: 20% 
                  of  daily  energy  intake  at  breakfast;  30%  for  lunch;  30%  for  dinner;  and  20%  for  snacks  (Food 
                  Standards Agency 2007). Given that children customarily consume five meals per day, including two 
                  snacks, each of these snacking occasions can account for 10% of energy intake, or 170 kcal on the 
                  basis of the daily reference energy intake of 1700 kcal described above. On the basis of the same 
                  rationale, the average child’s breakfast energy intake reference value was set at 340 kcal, while 
                  lunch and the evening meal can account for 510 kcal respectively. Energy caps for foods consumed 
                  as part of a meal have been set as a share of the energy reference value of the meal in question, 
                  taking into account the customary contribution of the particular product to the eating occasion, e.g. 
                  breakfast cereals as part of a complete breakfast; main dishes as part of a complete lunch or dinner. 
                  Specific additional rationales for individual values are given in the category sections in Section II 
                  below. 
                  Next steps 
                  The EU Pledge Common Nutrition Criteria entered into force across the EU for all EU Pledge member 
                  companies that advertise food and beverage products to children on 1 January 2015.  
                  Changes to the criteria – whereby members committed to a 10% sugar and salt reduction to the 
                  thresholds applicable in several products categories - were announced in March 2017 and will be 
                                        21
                  applicable end 2018 . 
                                                                             
                  21 Except for categories 2C (Potato chips and extruded/pelleted snacks) and 6C (Breakfast cereals) for which the agreed 
                  changes will be applicable by end 2019. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 20 
                   
                                                                                                                      
                 
                Member companies who can demonstrate that their current nutritional criteria are stricter than the 
                common criteria may continue using their own criteria. 
                EU Pledge member companies that do not advertise any of their products to children under 12 at all 
                have decided to maintain their policies. Therefore, the common nutrition criteria are not relevant for 
                them. 
                In line with WHO recommendations, the nutrition criteria should be amenable to adaptation in light 
                of new developments. These Common Nutrition Criteria may therefore be updated in the future, 
                potentially also to include food categories that are not represented currently.  
                Should  existing  or  future  EU  Pledge  member  companies  wish  to  develop  criteria  for  new  food 
                categories, i.e. categories not currently represented in these common nutrition criteria, they will 
                need to do so jointly within the EU Pledge initiative and in line with the common approach. 
                Section II: Nutrition criteria by category  
                    1.  Vegetable and animal based oils, fats and fat containing spreads & 
                        emulsion-based sauces (e.g. mayonnaise) 
                  Category 1: Vegetable and animal based oils, fats and fat containing spreads & emulsion-based 
                  sauces  
                  Sub-category A: Vegetable and animal based oils, fats and fat containing spreads: all animal and 
                  vegetable based fats and oils used as spreads on bread and/or the preparation of food22. 
                                                          Sodium      Saturated fats    Total sugars 
                                        Energy            (mg/100g  (g/100g or          (g/100g or     Components to 
                  Examples              (kcal/portion*)  or           100ml*)           100ml*)        encourage 
                                                          100ml*) 
                                        *except where specified otherwise 
                  Oils and fats (all          < 85          < 500      < 33% total fat      (< 5)      > 25% of total fat 
                  types), low-fat                                       is SAFA (incl.                 is PUFA 
                  margarine,                                                TFA) 
                  margarine, butter 
                  mélanges, oil/fat 
                  products for 
                  roasting and frying 
                  (solid or liquid)… 
                  Sub-category B: Emulsion-based sauces: sauces that constitute only a minor component of the meal to 
                  which an emulsifying agent is added OR have a fat content > 10% w/w. 
                  Mayonnaise, salad           < 85          < 750      < 33% total fat       < 5       > 25% of total fat 
                  dressings,                                            is SAFA (incl.                 is PUFA 
                  marinades,                                                TFA) 
                  vinaigrettes… 
                     
                                                                           
                22 Butters as defined in Regulation (EU) 1308/2013, are excluded from this category because they will not be advertised 
                towards children.  
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 21 
                 
                                                                                                                      
                 
                •   Product group: 
                        o  Sub-category A: The product group includes all animal and vegetable based fats and oils 
                                                                                     1
                            used as spreads on bread and/or the preparation of food . Examples are oils and fats (all 
                            types), low-fat margarine, margarine, butter mélanges, oil/fat products for roasting and 
                            frying (solid or liquid). 
                        o  Sub-category  B:  The  product  group  includes  sauces  that  constitute  only  a  minor 
                            component of the meal, to which an emulsifying agent is added OR have a fat content > 
                            10% w/w. Examples are mayonnaise, salad dressings, marinades, and vinaigrettes. 
                •   Energy: The threshold (85kcal) is equivalent to 5% of children’s daily reference value (1700kcal) 
                    per portion. The reference portions are 10g for spreads and 15ml/14g for most emulsion-based 
                    sauces. Application of this energy threshold only allows low-fat emulsion-based sauces (e.g. low-
                    fat mayonnaise) to comply. 
                •   Sodium:  
                        o  Sub-category A: Within Europe salt content in spreadable fats differs substantially. The 
                            level of 500mg/100g is challenging for products in e.g. UK (UK Responsibility Deal 2012 
                            targets for fat containing spreads vary from 40mg [unsalted] to 800mg). As portion sizes 
                            for this product group are relatively small, sodium contribution is relatively low (50mg/ 
                            portion). 
                        o  Sub-category B: A relatively higher sodium level is necessary for preservation in this sub-
                            category (microbes grow in water, not in fat; microbes do not grow in water with some 
                            sodium; products with higher water content, such as low-fat mayonnaise, therefore 
                            need  higher  sodium  to  prevent  spoilage23),  and  thus  not  to  penalize  reduced-fat 
                            products.  Criterion  is  the  same  as  applied  in  the  International  Choices  Programme 
                            (Roodenburg et al. 2011) and corresponds to the UK Responsibility Deal 2012 target for 
                            reduced fat mayonnaise. As portion sizes for this product group are relatively small, 
                            sodium contribution is relatively low (~105mg/ portion).  
                •   Saturated fats: For these product groups, consisting of relatively high-fat products, application 
                    of  the  reference  amount  “%  of  total  fat”  is  more  relevant  than  “g/100g”.  Indeed,  there  is 
                    scientific consensus that reducing SAFA per se is not beneficial for heart health but what matters 
                    is  what  SAFA  are  replaced  by.  In  this  product  group,  for  both  high  and  low  fat  levels,  it  is 
                    appropriate to replace SAFA by PUFA. Therefore, expression of SAFA as “% of total fat” better 
                    identifies healthier options within the product group, which are not necessarily products with a 
                    low SAFA content. The “g/100g” reference would also not provide an incentive for relatively low 
                    fat products to reformulate. Trans-fatty acids (TFAs) are included in the saturated fat threshold, 
                    due  to  their  public  health  relevance  in  this  group.  The  SAFA  threshold  (33%  of  total  fat) 
                    resembles the fatty acid profile of the healthier oils and fats and will exclude virtually all animal 
                    based products. Also the majority of stick margarines will be excluded. 
                •   Total sugars: For Subcategory A, sugars are not considered to be relevant. Nonetheless, the EU 
                    value for “low in sugar” as per Regulation EC 1924/2006 (5g/100g) is applied. The same value is 
                    applied to Subcategory B, where it is a challenging threshold for reduced-fat sauces. 
                •   Components to encourage: The products in this category are sources of poly-unsaturated fatty 
                    acids  (PUFAs)  (WHO  2003).  PUFAs  are  widely  acknowledged  as  nutrients  making  a  positive 
                                                                           
                23 Note that products in this category, in contrast to the other sub-category, are mainly ambient stable. 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 22 
                 
                                                                                                                      
                 
                    contribution to the diet and for which the average consumption among the European population 
                    is  inadequate  (Harika  et  al.  2011).  As  the  evidence  for  PUFAs  is  stronger  than  for  mono-
                    unsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) (Mozaffarian et al. 2010) the latter are not included.  
                What’s in and what’s out? 
                    •   The energy threshold allows reduced-fat sauces (e.g. low-fat mayonnaise) to comply but 
                        exclude full-fat varieties. 
                    •   The saturated fat criterion excludes animal fat-based products, as well as stick margarines. 
                    •   The sugar threshold is challenging for reduced-fat sauces. 
                         
                 
                    2.  Fruits, vegetables and seeds, except oil 
                                                          24
                 Category 2: Fruits, vegetables and seeds,  except oil Vegetables include legumes and potatoes. Seeds 
                                    include seeds, kernels, nuts. Nuts include peanuts and tree nuts. 
                Sub-category A: Products of fruits and vegetables except oils & potatoes (> 50g fruit and/or vegetable 
                                              25
                per 100g of finished products ) that constitute a substantial component of the meal.  
                Examples         Energy             Sodium            Saturated fats   Total sugars    Components to 
                                 (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or       (g/100g or       (g/100g or      encourage 
                                                    100ml*)           100ml*)          100ml*) 
                                 *except where specified otherwise 
                Vegetable              <170              < 300             < 1.5            < 15       Min. ½ portion 
                gratin,                                                                                of fruit and/or 
                ratatouille,                                                                           vegetables. 
                canned                                                                                 Components to 
                vegetables,                                                                            encourage 
                baked beans,                                                                           delivered 
                fruit compote,                                                                         through 
                fruit in syrup,                                                                        ingredients 
                fruit salad…                                                                           (fruit and/or 
                                                                                                       vegetables) 
                 
                •   Product group: The product group includes all fruit/vegetable based dishes (> 50g fruit and/or 
                    vegetable per 100g of finished products) that constitute a substantial component of the meal.  
                •   Energy:  The  threshold  (170kcal/portion)  represents  10%  of  children’s  daily  reference  value 
                    (1700kcal) per portion. A typical fruit or vegetable children’s portion corresponds to 80g. 
                •   Sodium: The sodium value of 300mg/100g corresponds to the UK 2012 Responsibility Deal 
                    target for bakes beans, quiches and flans.  
                •   Saturated fats: The threshold (1.5g/100g) corresponds with “Low in saturated fat”, as defined in 
                    Regulation (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods.  
                •   Total sugars: The total sugar value is mainly related to fruit content. The threshold is set at 15 
                    grams/100g,  which  excludes  preparations  made  solely  with  fruit  with  naturally  high  sugar 
                    content (e.g. grape 16g/100g).  
                                                                           
                24 Exemptions: 100% fruit and vegetables and their products, including 100% fruit and vegetable juices, as well as 100% 
                nuts and seeds and mixes thereof (with no added salt, sugar or fat). These products, presented fresh, frozen, dried, or 
                under any other form may be advertised to children without restrictions. 
                25 Local standards should apply for the purposes of quantifying fruit and vegetable content, e.g. conversion formulae for 
                dried fruit and vegetables into fresh equivalents. 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 23 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                  •    Components to encourage: These are based on the WHO dietary recommendation of ≥400 g per 
                       day of fruits and vegetables (WHO 2003). Campaigns generally advise people to eat five portions 
                       of fruit and vegetables daily (5x 80g fresh fruit or vegetables = total 400g), adopting the well-
                       known simple message of ‘5 A DAY’, initiated in the US and extended to several countries in 
                       Europe (WHO 2003 bis, WHO 2005, EUFIC 2012). Positive nutrients are delivered through the 
                       main ingredients of the fruit and vegetable preparation, as only products that contain > 50g of 
                       fruits  and  vegetables  per  100g  of  product  qualify  for  this  product  group.  One  portion 
                       corresponds to 80g fresh fruit or vegetables (or equivalent in non-fresh format). 
                  What’s in and what’s out? 
                      •  The  energy  threshold  ensures  that  various  fried,  creamy,  or  cheese  preparations  will  not 
                         qualify. 
                      •  The saturated fat threshold is challenging for e.g. cheese, cream, or meat containing products. 
                      •  The sugar cap is challenging for preparations such as fruit compote, as they may contain about 
                         17g of sugars, of which 11g are coming from fruit. This threshold still allows some product 
                         innovations with high fruit content. 
                   
                                               Category 2: Fruits, vegetables and seeds, except oil 
                  Subcategory B: Potato & potato products, except dehydrated potato snack products: all potato based 
                  dishes (> 50g potato per 100g of finished products) that constitute a substantial component of the 
                  meal.  
                  Examples           Energy               Sodium             Saturated fats      Total sugars     Components to 
                                     (kcal/portion*)      (mg/100g or        (g/100g or          (g/100g or       encourage 
                                                          100ml*)            100ml*)             100ml*) 
                                     *except where specified otherwise 
                  Mashed                   <170                < 300               < 1.5               < 5        Nutrients 
                  potato, potato                                                                                  delivered 
                  gnocchi,                                                                                        through main 
                  gratin, potato                                                                                  ingredient 
                  dumplings,                                                                                      (potato) 
                  fried or 
                  roasted 
                  potato… 
                        
                  •    Product group: The product group includes all potato based dishes (> 50g potato per 100g of 
                       finished products) that constitute a substantial component of a meal. The minimum quantity 
                       required should be calculated on the basis of the ingredients entering into the recipe.  
                  •    Energy: The threshold (170kcal/portion) represents 10% of children’s daily reference value 
                       (1700kcal) per portion. This energy threshold will ensure that fried potato and potato 
                       preparations with e.g. high content of cream and/or cheese do not qualify. Depending on the 
                       preparation, a typical child’s potato portion ranges from 80g (e.g. croquettes) to 180g (e.g. 
                       jacket potato or mashed potato). 
                  •    Sodium: The sodium value of 300mg/100g corresponds to the UK 2012 Responsibility Deal 
                       target for potato products. 
                  •    Saturated fats: The threshold (1.5g/100g) corresponds with “Low in saturated fat”, as defined in 
                       Regulation (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 24 
                   
                                                                                                                       
                  
                 •   Total sugars: the threshold (5g/100g) corresponds with “Low in sugars”, as defined in Regulation 
                     (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods. This amount allows products 
                     prepared with milk to comply. 
                 •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredient of the 
                     preparation, as only products that contain >50g of potato per 100g of product qualify for this 
                     product group.  
                 What’s in and what’s out? 
                     •   The energy threshold excludes most fried potato and potato preparations with e.g. high 
                         content of cream and/or cheese 
                     •   The saturated fat threshold is challenging for e.g. cheese or cream containing products as 
                         well as fried potato products. 
                  
                                          Category 2: Fruits, vegetables and seeds, except oil 
                 Subcategory C: Potato chips & potato based snacks, incl. dough-based products:  
                 Examples            Energy           Sodium            Saturated fats   Total sugars   Components to 
                                     (kcal/portion*)  (mg/100g or       (g/100g or       (g/100g or     encourage 
                                                      100ml*)           100ml*)          100ml*) 
                                     *except where specified otherwise 
                 Potato based snacks(incl. dough based products) 
                                                                26
                 Potato                   <170            < 603           < 10% kcal         < 10       Fibre: >3 
                 chips/crisps                                             from SAFA                     g/100g; and/or 
                                                                                                        >70% UFA/total 
                                                                                                        fat 
                                                                27
                 Extruded snacks,         < 170           < 810           < 10% kcal         < 10       Fibre: >3 
                 pelleted snacks,                                         from SAFA                     g/100g; and/or 
                 stackable chips                                                                        >70% UFA/total 
                                                                                                        fat 
                      
                 •   Product group: The product group includes potato chips and other potato-based snacks. The 
                     reference portion is 30g.  
                 •   Energy: The threshold (170kcal/portion) represents 10% of children’s daily reference value 
                     (1700kcal) per portion.  
                 •   Sodium:  The  sodium  value  for  potato  chips  (200mg/portion)  is  based  on  10%  children’s 
                     reference  value  for  7-10  year  olds  of  5g  salt  or  2000mg  sodium  per  day  (SACN  2003).  The 
                     threshold for potato-based snacks is based on UK Responsibility Deal 2012 targets, which take 
                     into account the functional role of sodium in such products. The sodium thresholds for both 
                     potato crisps/crisps and extruded snacks, pelleted snacks and stackable crisps will be further 
                     reduced by 10% by the end of 2019. 
                 •   Saturated fats: The saturated fat threshold (10% Kcal from SAF) is consistent with international 
                     dietary guidelines for saturated fat intake.  
                 •   Total sugars: For fried and baked products this level of sugars is consistent with the international 
                     consensus  that  <10%  energy  should  be  derived  from  added  sugars.   Sugars  are  not 
                                                                            
                 26 ≤ 670 until end 2019 
                 27 ≤ 900 until end 2019 
                 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 25 
                  
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                       discriminatory  for  this  category;  levels  are  usually  low  and  are  associated  with  seasoning 
                       applications. 
                  •    Components to encourage: The 3g/100 fibre is equivalent to the legal requirement for the 
                       “source of fibre claim” under the EU Nutrition and Health Claims Regulation and represents a 
                       significant amount. The value for unsaturated fatty acids (UFA) – min. 70% unsaturated fatty 
                       acids as a proportion of total fat - is equivalent to the value required for the “high unsaturated 
                       fat” claim under the EU Nutrition and Health Claim Regulation.  
                        
                       What’s in and what’s out? 
                           •    The sodium thresholds are challenging and ensure that only products reformulated to 
                                have a smaller number or amounts of sodium containing ingredients and reduced topical 
                                application of salt can be compliant. 
                           •    The saturated fat threshold ensures that healthier oils with a reduced level of saturated 
                                fat have to be employed. 
                                                       
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 26 
                   
                                                                                                                      
                 
                                         Category 2: Fruits, vegetables and seeds, except oil 
                Sub-category D: Seeds and nuts 
                Examples         Energy             Sodium            Saturated fats   Total sugars    Components 
                                 (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or       (g/100g or       (g/100g or      to encourage 
                                                    100ml*)           100ml*)          100ml*) 
                                 *except where specified otherwise 
                Salted or                                     28
                                       < 200            < 603              < 10             < 15       Nutrients 
                flavoured nuts                                                                         delivered 
                (e.g. Peanuts,                                                                         through 
                hazelnuts,                                                                             ingredients 
                cashew nuts,                                                                           (nuts and 
                pistachios,                                                                            seeds) 
                almonds, 
                walnuts), mixed 
                nuts, nut-fruit 
                mixes, peanut 
                butter… 
                •   Product group: The product group includes all seeds and nuts as well as coated nuts, excluding 
                    100% seeds and nuts, i.e. without added salt, fat or sugar, which are exempted. 
                •   Energy: The relatively high energy cap is a reflection of the high nutrient density of these energy 
                    dense  products.   As  well  as  being  high  in  good  fats,  delivering  calories,  nuts  are  also  an 
                    important source of a variety of micronutrients and other plant components thought to be 
                    beneficial for health.  As such, nuts can have an important role to play in the diet. 
                •   Sodium: The sodium threshold corresponds to 10% of a 7-10 year old child’s reference daily 
                    intake value of 5g salt (2000mg sodium) (SACN 2003). It will be further reduced by 10% by the 
                    end of 2018. 
                •   Saturated fats: The criterion for saturated fat will exclude both nuts which are naturally higher 
                    in saturated fats but also those which have been fried in oils which are higher in saturated fat. 
                •   Total sugars: The sugars criterion reflects the inclusion of dried fruit in fruit/nut mixes but will 
                    prohibit the use of thick sugary coatings on nuts. 
                •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredient (nuts, 
                    seeds), which area natural source of micronutrients. 
                     
                What’s in and what’s out? 
                    •   The criteria are designed to limit the inclusion of nut products whose nutrient composition 
                        has been adversely impacted by the addition of fat or sugar through frying, coating or 
                        inclusions. 
                 
                 
                 
                                                                           
                28 ≤ 670 until end 2018 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 27 
                 
                                                                                                                       
                  
                                           Category 2: Fruits, vegetables and seeds, except oil 
                 Sub-category E: Fruit/Vegetable based meal sauces: all fruit/vegetable based sauces (> 50g fruit 
                                                                29
                 and/or vegetable per 100g of finished products ) that constitute a substantial component of the meal 
                 Examples         Energy             Sodium            Saturated fats    Total sugars   Components to 
                                  (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or       (g/100g or        (g/100g or     encourage 
                                                     100ml*)           100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                  *except where specified otherwise 
                                                              30                                31
                 Tomato sauce,         < 100             < 450              < 1.5            < 9        Nutrients 
                 pasta sauce…                                                                           delivered 
                                                                                                        through 
                                                                                                        ingredients 
                                                                                                        (fruits and/or 
                                                                                                        vegetables) 
                      
                 •   Product group: The product group includes all fruit/vegetable based sauces (> 50g fruit and/or 
                     vegetable per 100g of finished products) that constitute a substantial component of the meal.  
                 •   Energy: The threshold (100kcal/portion)  is the  same  as  applied  in  the  International  Choices 
                     Programme (Roodenburg et al. 2011). This value represents ~6% of children’s daily reference 
                     value (1700kcal) per portion (reference portion: 100ml).  
                 •   Sodium: Meal sauces are normally added to unflavoured carbohydrates and vegetables acting as 
                     the main meal flavour provider. These products are consumed in smaller portions than soups 
                     (100ml  vs.  200ml),  for  which  a  350mg  sodium  value  is  defined.  The  sodium  threshold  is 
                     challenging for various sauces and will be further reduced by 10% by the end of 2018. 
                 •   Saturated fats:  The threshold  (1.5g) corresponds with “Low in saturated fat”, as defined in 
                     Regulation (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods.  
                 •   Total sugars: The total sugar value is related to the fruit/vegetable content, as only meal sauces 
                     consisting of >50% fruits and/or vegetables are included in this product group. The threshold 
                     allows sauces prepared from high sugar containing vegetables (e.g. beet root, sweet pepper, 
                     corn, tomato) to comply, and to stimulate (and not penalize) innovations towards high vegetable 
                     content sauces. It will be further reduced by 10% by the end of 2018. 
                 •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredients of the 
                     meal sauces, as only these sauces that contain > 50g of fruits and vegetables per 100g product 
                     are classified in this product group.  
                      
                     What’s in and what’s out? 
                         •   The energy and nutrient limits exclude a number of cream, cheese and meat-containing 
                             sauces.  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                                                                            
                 29 See footnote 25 
                 30 ≤500 until end 2018 
                 31 ≤10 until end 2018 
                 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 28 
                  
                                                                                                                       
                  
                                           Category 2: Fruits, vegetables and seeds, except oil 
                 Sub-category F: Fruit/Vegetable based condiments: all fruit/vegetable based condiments (> 50g fruit 
                 and/or vegetable per 100g of finished products32) that constitute only a minor component of the meal. 
                 Examples         Energy             Sodium            Saturated fats    Total sugars   Components to 
                                  (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or       (g/100g or        (g/100g or     encourage 
                                                     100ml*)           100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                  *except where specified otherwise 
                 Tomato                 < 85              < 750             < 1.5            < 25       Nutrients 
                 ketchup,                                                                               delivered 
                 chutney…                                                                               through 
                                                                                                        ingredients 
                                                                                                        (fruit and/or 
                                                                                                        vegetables) 
                 •   Product group: All fruit/vegetable-based condiments (> 50g fruit and/or vegetable per 100g of 
                     finished products) that constitute only a minor component of the meal.  
                 •   Energy: The threshold (85kcal) is equivalent to 5% of children’s daily reference value (1700kcal) 
                     per portion.  
                 •   Sodium: The sodium threshold is the same as applied in the International Choices Programme 
                     (Roodenburg et al. 2011) and is close to the relatively stringent UK Responsibility Deal 2012 
                     target  for  ketchups  (730mg).  A  relatively  higher  sodium  level  is  set  for  this  product  group 
                     (compared to vegetable based meal sauces): as portion sizes for this product group are relatively 
                     small (15ml, 14g), sodium contribution is relatively low (~105mg/portion).  
                 •   Saturated fats:  The threshold  (1.5g) corresponds with “Low in saturated fat”, as defined in 
                     Regulation (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods.  
                 •   Total sugars: The total sugar value is related to the fruit/vegetable content, as only condiments 
                     consisting of >50% fruits and/or vegetables are included in this product group. Higher sugar 
                     levels are expected in these products due to concentration: ingredients are reduced in cooking 
                     (e.g. chutneys). Therefore, a relatively higher sugar level is set for this product group (compared 
                     to vegetable based meal sauces). As portion sizes for this product group are relatively small, 
                     sugar contribution is relatively low (3.5g/portion).  
                 •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredients of 
                     condiments, as only these condiments that contain > 50g of fruits and vegetables per 100g 
                     product are classified in this product group. 
                      
                     What’s in and what’s out? 
                         •   The sodium threshold is challenging for various ketchups and savoury condiments. 
                                                  
                                                                            
                 32 See footnote 25 
                 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 29 
                  
                                                                                                                                  
                   
                       3.  Meat based products 
                    Category 3: Meat based products: all kinds of processed meat/poultry, and meat products, consisting 
                                               of minimally 50g of meat per 100g finished product 
                   Examples           Energy            Sodium              Saturated fats  Total sugars        Components to 
                                      (kcal/portion*)   (mg/100g or         (g/100g or        (g/100g or        encourage 
                                                        100ml*)             100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                      *except where specified otherwise 
                   Ready-to-eat            < 170              < 800              < 6g              (< 5)        > 12% of energy 
                   meatballs,                                                                                   as protein 
                   salami, 
                   smoked beef, 
                   grilled ham, 
                   chicken fillet, 
                   sausages… 
                        
                  •    Product  group:  The  product  group  includes  all  kinds  of  processed  meat/poultry,  and  meat 
                       products, consisting of minimally 50g of meat per 100g finished product (fresh meat as defined 
                       in Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 is exempted). Note that it also includes ready dishes 
                       where meat is the  main  ingredient  (>50%)  such  as  “Blanquette  de  veau”  or  “Fricassée  de 
                       volaille”. 
                  •    Energy:  The  threshold  (170kcal)  is  equivalent  to  10%  of  children’s  daily  reference  value 
                       (1700kcal),  which  represents  up  to  1/3  of  the  energy  content  of  a  meal  (510kcal).  Various 
                       recommendations for schools menus indicate children’s portion sizes ranging from 45 to 125g, 
                       depending on product type and children’s age. This threshold is challenging for various meat 
                       products.  
                  •    Sodium: Salt (sodium) is necessary for meat preservation. The 800mg threshold, which is more 
                       stringent than the criterion as applied in the International Choices Programme (Roodenburg et 
                       al. 2011). 
                  •    Saturated fats: In combination with the energy criterion, the SAFA threshold is a challenging cut-
                       off. Meat is a natural source of fat and saturated fat (with SAFA levels up to 50% of total fat) 
                       Application of the saturated fat criterion will exclude meat products with a fat content >12%. 
                       Total sugars: For this product group, sugars are not considered to be relevant. The EU value for 
                       “low  in  sugar”  as  per  Regulation  EC  1924/2006  (5g/100g)  is  applied,  to  allow  a  margin  for 
                       flavouring or for sauces based on e.g. herbs, vegetables, and fruit. 
                  •    Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredients of 
                       these products, as only products that contain > 50g of meat per 100g product are classified in 
                       this product group. Meat is an important contributor of protein and its content should be in line 
                       with the EC claim “source of” (12% of energy as protein). 
                        
                       What’s in and what’s out? 
                           •   The sodium and saturated fat thresholds only allow reduced-salt versions of cured meats, 
                               exclude most sausages, and generally require all meat products to comply with a fat 
                               content < 12% 
                           •   Meat-based dishes are challenged by the min 12% energy-from-protein value as well as 
                               the sodium value. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                Page 30 
                   
                                                                                                                                 
                   
                      4.  Fishery products 
                      Category 4: Fishery products: all kinds of processed fish, processed crustaceans and shellfish, 
                         consisting of min. 50g of fish, crustaceans, and/or molluscs per 100g of finished product. 
                  Examples          Energy              Sodium             Saturated fats  Total sugars         Components 
                                    (kcal/portion*)     (mg/100g or        (g/100g or        (g/100g or         to encourage 
                                                        100ml*)            100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                    *except where specified otherwise 
                  Cod parings,           < 170               < 450           < 33% total           (<5)         > 12% of 
                  fried fillet of                                            fat is SAFA                        energy as 
                  haddock, fish            OR                                (including                         protein 
                                             
                  fingers,               > 170                                  TFA) 
                  pickled             IF > 25% of 
                  mussels,          total fat is PUFA 
                  tinned tuna, 
                  fish-based 
                  dishes (>50% 
                  fish)… 
                   
                  •   Product group: The product group includes all kinds of processed fish, processed crustaceans 
                      and  shellfish,  consisting  of  minimally  50g  of  fish,  crustaceans,  and/or  molluscs  per  100g  of 
                      finished product, as well as ready dishes where fish is the main ingredient (>50%) such as “Hake 
                      à la Provençale”. 
                  •   Energy:  The  threshold  (170kcal)  is  equivalent  to  10%  of  children’s  daily  reference  value 
                      (1700kcal), which represents up to 1/3 of the energy content of a meal (510kcal). To stimulate 
                      the consumption of fatty fish containing high PUFA levels, fish products that contain PUFA levels 
                      over 25% of total fat are permitted to exceed this energy threshold.  
                  •   Sodium: The sodium threshold (450mg) is the same as applied in The International Choices 
                      Programme. More than 50% of the Choices EU database (Roodenburg et al. 2011 bis) complies 
                      with this threshold.  
                  •   Saturated fats: As for the fats and oils product group it is more relevant to express the SAFA 
                      threshold as % of total fat: to allow fatty fish (containing around 3-8g SAFA/100g) to comply, but 
                      to also provide an incentive for processed lean fish (e.g. fish fingers) to reformulate towards 
                      lower SAFA levels (e.g. through application of healthier oils). 
                  •   Total sugars: for this product group, sugars are not considered to be relevant. The EU value for 
                      “low  in  sugar”  as  per  Regulation  EC  1924/2006  (5g/100g)  is  applied,  to  allow  a  margin  for 
                      flavouring or for sauces based on e.g. on herbs, vegetables, fruit. 
                  •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredients of 
                      these products, as only products that contain > 50g of fish per 100g product are classified in this 
                      product group. Fish is an important contributor of protein and its content should be in line with 
                      EC claim “source of” (12% of energy as protein). 
                       
                      What’s in and what’s out? 
                           •   The sodium threshold is challenging for various pickled, smoked and canned fish 
                               products. 
                           •   The saturated fats threshold is challenging for e.g. (deep) fried fish products 
                           •   Fish fillets comply, some non-reformulated fried fish products, and various canned, 
                               pickled, and smoked products will often not. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                               Page 31 
                   
                                                                                                                      
                 
                    5.  Dairy products 
                                                       Category 5: Dairy products 
                  Sub-category A: Dairy Products other than cheeses: Must contain minimum 50% dairy (Codex 
                  Alimentarius standard) 
                   
                  Examples       Energy             Sodium            Saturated fats   Total sugars      Components 
                                 (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or       (g/100g or       (g/100g or        to encourage 
                                                    100ml*)           100ml*)          100ml*) 
                                 *except where specified otherwise 
                                                              33                                 34
                  Milks and            <170             < 160              < 2.6           < 12.5        Protein: >12 
                  milk                                                                                   E% or >2 g 
                  substitutes;                                                                           /100g or 
                  yoghurts;                                                                              100ml 
                  sweet fresh/                                                                           and/or 
                  soft cheese;                                                                           At least one 
                  curd &                                                                                 source of: 
                  quark;                                                                                 Calcium or Vit 
                  fermented                                                                              D or any Vit B 
                  milks; dairy                                                                            
                  desserts… 
                 
                •   Product group:  
                        o  Milk and milk substitutes: Flavored milk drinks as prepared (product values based on 
                            preparation  instructions;  criteria  cut-off  per  100ml)  or  other  flavoured  powder 
                            preparations. 
                        o  Yoghurts: Plain or fruit, skimmed, semi skimmed and whole milk yogurts, spoonable or 
                            drinkable 
                        o  Sweet  fresh/soft  cheese-based,  curd,  quark  products  :  Plain  or  fruit  fresh 
                            cheeses/curd/quark  or  preparations  with  sweet  ingredients  (e.g.  fruits,  honey, 
                            chocolate) that may have added sugar; sweet cheese-based dip with e.g. cereal sticks 
                        o  Fermented  milk drinks: buttermilk, plain or fruit based or flavored skimmed, semi-
                            skimmed and whole fat yoghurt drinks 
                        o  Dairy desserts: Puddings, mousse, crèmes, flans 
                •   Energy: Based on 10% of the children’s reference value per portion (several servings of this basic 
                    food group recommended); kcal cut-off per portion without further portion size specification 
                    covers big variances in the portion sizes within this category (due to very different product 
                    types) and the producer can modify between fat and sugar content and portion size. 
                •   Sodium:  Fresh dairy products are not a major sodium contributor to the diet, but there is 
                    intrinsic sodium and some sodium added with fruit preparation; the threshold value includes a 
                    wide range of products such as curd & quark products with higher density. It will be considerably 
                    reduced to ≤160mg by the end of 201835. 
                •   Saturated fats: The value corresponds to the natural saturated fat content of full fat milk (60-
                    70% of total milk fat is saturated fat, taking into account seasonal variations and variations due 
                                                                           
                33 ≤ 300 until end 2018 
                34 ≤ 13.5 until end 2018 
                35 The new sodium threshold corresponds to 10% of a 7-10 year old child’s reference daily intake value of 5g salt (2000mg 
                sodium) (SACN 2003), adjusted for a 170kcal and 125g portion 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 32 
                 
                                                                                                                       
                  
                     to cow feeding); cut off based on the International Choices Programme (Roodenburg et al. 2011 
                     bis) database evaluation and indicator foods.  The limit is combined with energy cut-off. 
                 •   Total sugars: The threshold takes into account the diverse product types within this category; 
                     milk contains intrinsic lactose (5 g/100ml) and often natural sugars from added fruit. It will be 
                                                                 36
                     further reduced by 10% (12.5g) by end 2018 .  
                 •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through min 50% dairy as a group 
                     definition. Dairy stands for a substantial intake of positive nutrients (protein, calcium, vitamins 
                     B). Calcium is a very important nutrient to encourage since the contribution to intake from fresh 
                     dairy products is high. Protein min 12%E as per EU Regulation – since energy levels can differ 
                     between types of products, a min protein content of 2g/100g or 100ml is also set; Calcium, 
                     Vitamins D and B in significant amount as per EU Regulation i.e. 15% of RDA per 100g; for drinks 
                     7.5% of RDA per 100ml. Calcium: 120mg per 100g or 60mg per 100ml; For Vitamins B, it depends 
                     on the Vitamin, but for example : VitB12: 0.375µg per 100g or 0.1875µg per 100ml;  VitB2: 
                     0.21mg per 100g or 0.105 mg per 100ml. 
                  
                 What’s in and what’s out? 
                     •   Controlled fat and sugar milk/yoghurt drinks in appropriate portions comply, as do plain or 
                         fruit, skimmed, semi skimmed and whole milk yoghurt, as well as controlled -fat / sugar 
                         sweet cheese-based dips 
                     •   Yoghurt in large serving sizes, indulgent yoghurts and non-fat/salt controlled dips do not 
                     •   Plain or fruit or flavored drinking yoghurts prepared with skimmed, semi-skimmed or whole 
                         fat milk that are controlled for sugar & fat (150-200ml portion) comply as long as they meet 
                         the energy and sugar thresholds. 
                     •   Desserts such as caramel Puddings, chocolate mousse or crème caramel do not comply, with 
                         a few strictly reformulated exceptions. 
                  
                                                  
                                                                            
                 36 The new threshold (1g/100g lower compared to the previous threshold) takes into account the diverse product types 
                 within this category; milk contains intrinsic lactose (5g/100ml) and often natural sugars from added fruit. 
                 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 33 
                  
                                                                                                                      
                 
                                                      Category 5: Dairy products 
                  Sub-category B: Cheese and savoury dairy based products: Must contain minimum 50% dairy 
                  (Codex Alimentarius standard) 
                  Examples       Energy             Sodium           Saturated fats    Total sugars      Components 
                                 (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or      (g/100g or        (g/100g or        to 
                                                    100ml*)          100ml*)           100ml*)           encourage 
                                 *except where specified otherwise 
                  Hard, semi-hard cheeses 
                                                         37                                                    41
                  Gouda,               < 85         < 855  if SAFA   < 15 if sodium         (< 5)        Rich in : 
                                                                           39
                  Edam, blue                        < 15             < 855                               Calcium, Vit 
                  cheese,                           or               or                                  B12 or Vit 
                                                         38
                  gorgonzola…                       < 760  if SAFA   < 16 if sodium                      B2 
                                                                           40                             
                                                    < 16             < 760  
                  Other cheeses, curd & quark and savory dairy-based products   
                                                             42
                  Cream                <170             < 700              < 11              < 8               43
                  cheese,                                                                                Rich in : 
                  quark,                                                                                 Calcium, Vit 
                  processed                                                                              B12 or Vit 
                  cheese                                                                                 B2 
                  slices…                                                                                 
                 
                Hard-/Semi-hard cheeses:  
                •   Product group (Codex standard for Cheese 283-1978 definition): Ripened cheese with different fat 
                    percentage in dry matter (<10, between 10-25, 25–45, 45-60, >60) 
                •   Energy: The threshold is based on 5% of children’ s reference intake value; lower %- value for  
                    fat-reduced  cheeses  that  have  less  variable  and  smaller  serving  sizes  than  the  sweet  dairy 
                    products. Note: SFA criterion is already limiting/defining the energy content of the product due 
                    to the proportional amount of fat/SFA in milk fat.  
                •   Sodium: Sodium in hard/semi hard cheese is needed for the cheese making process and for 
                    conservation. Due to recent and ongoing sodium reduction initiatives in several EU Member 
                    States, the 2012 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper foresaw the potential to further reduce this 
                    value in 3 years’ time. Having reviewed the situation in early 2015, the EU Pledge Nutrition 
                    Working  Group  agreed  to  introduce  an  optional  lower  sodium  threshold  (800mg/100g)  to 
                    incentive  further  sodium  reduction.  To  make  this  lower  sodium  threshold  workable,  the 
                    accompanying  maximum  SAFA  threshold  is  raised  by  1g/100g,  to  16.  If  the  lower  sodium 
                    threshold is not used, the SAFA threshold remains at 15g/100g. EU Pledge members adopted a 
                    further 5% sodium reduction to both thresholds applicable by the end of 2018. 
                                                                           
                37 ≤ 900 until end 2018 
                38 ≤ 800 until end 2018 
                39 ≤ 900 until end 2018 
                40 ≤ 800 until end 2018 
                41 ‘Rich in Ca, Vit B12 or Vit B2’ replaces ‘At least one source of’ by end 2018 
                42 The EU Pledge Nutrition Working Group agreed to introduce an optional lower sodium threshold (going from 
                800mg/100g to 700mg/100g) to incentive further sodium reduction by the end of 2018. To make this lower sodium 
                threshold workable, the accompanying maximum SAFA threshold is raised by 1g/100g, from 10 to 11. If the lower sodium 
                threshold is not used, the SAFA threshold remains at 10g/100g. 
                43 ‘At least one source of’ until 1 January 2018 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 34 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                  •    Saturated fats: The value allows fat-reduced 30+ Cheese to comply; still acceptable in taste for 
                       consumers and it supplies a lot of positive nutrients, such as Ca; P; B2; B12; A; K; Zn; Se.  
                  •    Total Sugars: For this product group, sugars are not considered to be relevant, since no sugar is 
                       naturally present in cheese. The EU value for “low in sugar” as per Regulation EC 1924/2006 
                       (5g/100g) is stated. 
                  •    Components to encourage: Min. 50% dairy as the group definition; therefore does contain 
                       several positive nutrients e.g. rich in Calcium, Vit B12, B2. 
                   
                  Other Cheeses, curd & quark and savory dairy-based products:  
                  •    Product group: 
                           o  Processed cheese: (General Standard for Food Additives definition): Product with a very 
                                long  shelf  life  obtained  by  melting  and  emulsifying  cheese.  Includes  products 
                                manufactured by heating and emulsifying mixtures of cheese, milkfat, milk protein, milk 
                                powder, and water in different amounts. Products may contain other added ingredients, 
                                such  as  aromas,  seasonings  and  fruit,  vegetables  and/or  meat.  Product  may  be 
                                spreadable or cut into slices and pieces. 
                           o  Fresh/Soft cheese (Codex standard for Cheese 283-1978 definition): Unripened cheese 
                                with different fat % in dry matter (<10, between 10-25, 25–45, 45-60, >60), curd/quark, 
                                including plain, flavored and prepared with other ingredients (e.g. ham); savory dairy-
                                based products e.g. cheese dip with bread sticks/corn chips. 
                  •    Energy:  The  threshold  is  based  on  10%  of  children’s  reference  intake  value.  The  key 
                       discriminating factor in this category is not energy but saturated fat content.  
                  •    Sodium:  The value corresponds to the UK Responsibility Deal target for processed cheese slices, 
                       strings etc. 
                  •    Saturated fats: The lower saturated fat limit than for natural cheese will only allow fat-reduced 
                       versions of other cheeses to comply. 
                  •    Total sugars: Allows some added sugars, e.g. coming from flavour preparations and from the 
                       additional component (e.g. bread stick) in the dip products. 
                  •    Components to encourage: Min. 50% dairy as the group definition; therefore does contain 
                       several positive nutrients e.g. at least one source of: Calcium, Vit B12, B2 
                   
                  What’s in and what’s out? 
                       •   30% reduced-fat cheeses meet the criteria with additional sodium cut-off; full-fat cheeses will 
                           not. 
                       •   Fat-reduced savoury fresh/cream/soft cheeses (if meeting sodium as well), other cheeses 
                           prepared with additional ingredients, e.g. ham, may fail the sugar criterion. 
                       •   Savoury dairy-based products, such as cheese dip with bread sticks  do not meet criteria 
                           unless of the reduced-fat and salt variety. 
                   
                                                       
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 35 
                   
                                                                                                                                  
                   
                       6.  Cereal based products 
                                                        Category 6: Cereal based products 
                   Sub-category A: Sweet biscuits, fine bakery wares and other cereal based products: cereal must be listed 
                   as the main ingredient on the ingredient declaration. 
                   Examples         Energy              Sodium             Saturated         Total          Components to 
                                    (kcal/portion*)     (mg/100g or        fats              sugars         encourage 
                                                        100ml*)            (g/100g or        (g/100g or 
                                                                           100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                    *except where specified otherwise 
                   All kinds of           < 200              < 450              < 10             < 35       Fibre (>3 g/100g) 
                   biscuits and                                                                             and/or whole grain 
                   cakes, cereal                                                                            (15% of total 
                   bars,                                                                                    ingredients) and or 
                   flapjacks…                                                                               >20% energy from 
                                                                                                            UFA and >70% 
                                                                                                            UFA/total fat 
                  •    Product  group:  Category  definition:  cereal  must  be  listed  as  the  main  ingredient  on  the 
                       ingredient declaration. Products included in this category can be consumed as snacks but also 
                       part of other meal occasions such as breakfast. Portions are defined by sectoral associations, e.g. 
                       the European Chocolate, Biscuit and Confectionery Association (CAOBISCO) and the European 
                       Snacks Association (ESA) or unit designed to be consumed on one occasion. 
                  •    Energy: The threshold is equivalent to 12% of children’s reference intake value. Given that a 
                       typical  breakfast  accounts  for  20%  of  daily  energy  intake,  the  12%  value  for  cereal-based 
                       products leaves sufficient room for other breakfast components, dairy and fruit (juice). 
                  •    Sodium: This is the maximum level set in the UK’s Responsibility Deal for sweet biscuits. 
                  •    Saturated fats: The value corresponds to the upper limit of what can currently be achieved 
                       through reformulation efforts across the range of product types within this category.  
                  •    Total sugars: This cereal category contains a wide range of products; some of these may contain 
                       fruit or milk, which are sources of naturally occurring sugars. No scientific support for negative 
                       effect  in  this  category.  The  bulking  effect  of  sugar  requires  substitution  when  reducing  this 
                       nutrient with a risk of fat – and thus energy – increasing. 
                  •    Components to encourage: The 3g fibre/100g is equivalent to the legal requirement for the 
                       “source of fibre claim” under the EU Nutrition and Health Claims Regulation and represents a 
                       significant amount. The value for unsaturated fatty acids (UFA) is equivalent to the value used 
                       required  for  the  “high  unsaturated  fat”  claim  under  the  EU  Nutrition  and  Health  Claim 
                       Regulation. 
                        
                       What’s in and what’s out? 
                           •   Biscuits made with wholegrain and products with special focus on better fat composition 
                               are included. 
                           •   Some cereal bars and biscuits with fruity filling will  not  pass  because  of their  sugar 
                               content. 
                           •   Most products with a fatty filling or chocolate covered do not pass because of saturated 
                               fat content. 
                           •   Many products based on flour do not fulfil the positive criteria for fibre/wholegrain. 
                        
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                Page 36 
                   
                                                                                                                    
                 
                                                  Category 6: Cereal based products 
                 Sub-category B: Savoury biscuits, fine bakery wares and other cereal based products, including dough-based 
                 products: cereal must be listed as the main ingredient on the ingredient declaration. 
                 Examples       Energy            Sodium           Saturated fats  Total sugars     Components to 
                                (kcal/portion*)   (mg/100g or      (g/100g or       (g/100g or      encourage 
                                                  100ml*)          100ml*)          100ml*) 
                                *except where specified otherwise 
                 Savoury             < 170             < 900         < 10%kcal           < 10       Fibre: >3 g/100g; 
                 crackers,                                           from SAFA                      and/or >70% 
                 extruded                                                                           UFA/ total fat 
                 snacks, 
                 pelleted 
                 snacks, 
                 pretzel 
                 products, 
                 popcorn & 
                 popcorn-
                 based 
                 snacks… 
                  
                •   Product  group:  Category  definition:  cereal  must  be  listed  as  the  main  ingredient  on  the 
                    ingredient declaration.  
                •   Energy:  These  products  are  usually  intended  to  be  consumed  as  snacks;  the  170kcal  value 
                    corresponds to 10% of daily intake reference value for children. The reference portion is 30g. 
                •   Sodium: Based on UK Responsibility Deal 2012 targets for pelleted snacks. 
                •   Saturated  fats:  The  SAFA  limit  of  10%  of  energy  is  consistent  with  international  dietary 
                    guidelines for saturated fat intake. 
                •   Total sugars: This level of sugars is consistent with the international consensus that <10% energy 
                    should be derived from added sugars.  Sugars are not discriminatory for this category; levels are 
                    usually low and are associated with seasoning applications. 
                •   Components to encourage: The 3g/100 fibre is equivalent to the legal requirement for the 
                    “source of fibre claim” under the EU Nutrition and Health Claims Regulation and represents a 
                    significant amount. The value for unsaturated fatty acids (UFA) is equivalent to the value used 
                    required  for  the  “high  unsaturated  fat”  claim  under  the  EU  Nutrition  and  Health  Claim 
                    Regulation. 
                 
                What’s in and what’s out? 
                    •   Sodium and saturated fat are the key discriminating values for this category. Many pretzel-
                        type products, for instance, will not meet the set values. 
                     
                 
                                                 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                     Page 37 
                 
                                                                                                                   
                 
                                                  Category 6: Cereal based products 
                 Sub-category C: Breakfast Cereals including porridge 
                 Examples       Energy            Sodium           Saturated fats  Total         Components to 
                                (kcal/portion*)   (mg/100g or      (g/100g or      sugars        encourage 
                                                  100ml*)          100ml*)         (g/100g or 
                                                                                   100ml*) 
                                *except where specified otherwise 
                 Ready to            < 210            < 450             < 5           < 2744     Fibre (>3g/100g) 
                 eat                                                                             and/or wholegrain 
                 breakfast                                                                       (15% whole grain 
                 cereals, e.g.                                                                   per total 
                 cornflakes,                                                                     ingredients) 
                 puffed rice, 
                 porridge… 
                •   Product  group:  Category  definition:  cereal  must  be  listed  as  the  main  ingredient  on  the 
                    ingredient declaration. Products included in this category can be consumed as snacks but also 
                    part of other meal occasions such as breakfast. Portions are defined by sectoral associations, e.g. 
                    the  European Breakfast Cereals Association (CEEREAL) and the European Snacks Association 
                    (ESA) or unit designed to be consumed on one occasion. For porridges and similar products, 
                    values  in  this  category  apply  to  food  as  reconstituted,  ready  for  consumption,  following 
                    manufacturer’s instructions. 
                •   Energy:  This  threshold  represents  c.  12%  of  children’s  reference  intake  value.  This  value  is 
                    designed to enable products intended to be consumed as part of a balanced breakfast to be 
                    included. It is slightly higher than the threshold for sweet biscuits, fine bakery wares and other 
                    cereal based products (210 instead of 200kcal/portion) to enable the inclusion of porridge-based 
                    products that require reconstituting prior to consumption, usually with the addition of milk. For 
                    ready to eat cereals that do not need to be reconstituted, the values apply to the cereals as sold.  
                •   Sodium: The sodium value (450mg) is corresponds to the maximum target for 2012 set by the 
                    UK’s Department of Health in its Responsibility Deal. 
                •   Saturated  fats:  Below  the  level  proposed  in  the  International  Choices  Programme  model 
                    (Roodenburg et al. 2011). 
                •   Total sugars: The 30g/100g value corresponds to <11% of children’s reference value (based on 
                    85g sugar/day), well within breakfast recommendations (18% sugar reference value including 
                    contribution  from  milk).  These  products  may  contain  fruit,  which  is  a  source  of  naturally 
                    occurring sugars. The threshold will be further reduced by 10% by the end of 2019,  
                •   Components to encourage: The 3g fibre/100g is equivalent to the legal requirement for the 
                    “source of fibre” claim under the EU Nutrition and Health Claims Regulation and represents a 
                    significant amount.  
                     
                What’s in and what’s out? 
                    •   Sugar content is the key discriminating value. Many chocolate and sugar-coated ready-to-eat 
                        products do not qualify. On the other hand, products such as porridge oats do. 
                    •   The sodium threshold is also discriminating: some extruded products with lower sugar do not 
                        qualify. 
                                                                           
                44 ≤ 30g until end 2019 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                    Page 38 
                 
                                                                                                                      
                 
                                                  Category 6: Cereal based products 
                Sub-category D: Cereal and cereal products except breakfast cereals, biscuits and fine bakery wares: cereal 
                must be listed as the main ingredient. 
                Examples        Energy             Sodium           Saturated fats  Total sugars      Components to 
                                (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or      (g/100g or       (g/100g or       encourage 
                                                   100ml*)          100ml*)          100ml*) 
                                *except where specified otherwise 
                                                            45
                Bread, rusks,          <340            <450               <5               <5         Fibre (>3 g/100 
                rice, noodles,                                                                        g) and/or 
                pasta,                                                                                wholegrain 
                polenta…                                                                              (15% of total 
                                                                                                      ingredients) 
                •   Product  group:  Category  definition:  cereal  must  be  listed  as  the  main  ingredient  on  the 
                    ingredient declaration. These products include staples such as bread, noodles, pasta polenta etc. 
                    Values  in  this  category  apply  to  food  as  reconstituted,  ready  for  consumption,  following 
                    manufacturer’s instructions. 
                •   Energy: The 340kcal threshold corresponds to 20% of children’s daily reference intake value. 
                    These products usually constitute a significant part of a meal: based on reference intake values, 
                    the energy content of lunch of dinner is 510kcal, so that the 340kcal limit for these products 
                    leaves 170kcal for other meal components. 
                •   Sodium: The sodium value, 500mg/100g, is similar to the value used in the International Choices 
                    Programme (Roodenburg et al. 2011) system. It is challenging for a range of products and should 
                    stimulate innovation. It will be further reduced by 10% by the end of 2018. 
                •   Saturated  fats:  Below  the  level  proposed  in  the  International  Choices  Programme  model 
                    (Roodenburg et al. 2011). 
                •   Total sugars: The 5g/100g sugar threshold reflects the fact that some of these products contain 
                    a certain amount of naturally occurring sugars. 
                •   Components to encourage: The 3g fibre/100g is equivalent to the legal requirement for the 
                    “source of fibre” claim under the EU Nutrition and Health Claims Regulation and represents a 
                    significant amount.  
                 
                What’s in and what’s out? 
                    •   Components  to  encourage  (fibre  and/or  whole  grain)  criteria  are  challenging  for  most 
                        traditional  wheat  based  products  if  not  reformulated:  instant  noodles,  pasta,  spaetzle, 
                        semolina gnocchi … 
                    •   Salt reduced versions of ready to eat polenta may comply as made from milled whole corn 
                        (maize). 
                                                 
                                                                           
                45 ≤ 500 until end 2018 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 39 
                 
                                                                                                                       
                  
                     7.  Soups, composite dishes, main courses and filled sandwiches 
                  Category 7: Soups, composite dishes, main courses and filled sandwiches 
                   
                  Sub-category A: Soups: all kinds of soups and broths containing min 1 of the following: 30g fruit, 
                             46
                  vegetables , cereals, meat, fish, milk or any combination of those (calculated as fresh equivalent) per 
                  portion. (Thresholds apply to food as reconstituted, ready for consumption, following manufacturer’s 
                  instructions). 
                                   Energy             Sodium          Saturated fats    Total sugars   Components to 
                  Examples         (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or     (g/100g or        (g/100g or     encourage 
                                                      100ml*)         100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                   *except where specified otherwise 
                                                               47                                48
                                         < 170           < 315             < 1.5           < 6.75      Nutrients 
                  Tinned tomato                                                                        delivered 
                  soup, instant                                                                        through 
                  vegetable                                                                            ingredients 
                  soup, soup in                                                                        (fruits and/or 
                  stand-up                                                                             vegetables, 
                  pouches…                                                                             cereals, meat, 
                                                                                                       fish, milk) 
                 •   Product group: The product group includes all kinds of soups and broths containing min 1 of the 
                     following: 30g fruit, vegetables, cereals, meat, fish, milk or any combination of those (calculated 
                     as fresh equivalent) per portion.  
                 •   Energy:  The  threshold  (170kcal)  is  equivalent  to  10%  of  children’s  daily  reference  value 
                     (1700kcal) per portion (200ml). 
                 •   Sodium: The sodium threshold (350mg) is the same as applied in the International Choices 
                     Programme (Roodenburg et al. 2011).  It will be further reduced by 10% by the end of 2018. 
                 •   Saturated fats:  The threshold  (1.5g) corresponds with “Low in saturated fat”, as defined in 
                     Regulation (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods.  
                 •   Total sugars: The threshold allows soups prepared from high sugar containing vegetables (e.g. 
                     beet  root,  sweet  pepper,  corn,  tomato)  to  comply,  and  to  stimulate  (and  not  penalize) 
                     innovation towards high vegetable content soups. It will be further reduced by 10% by the end 
                     of 2018. 
                 •   Components to encourage: Positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredients of the 
                     soups, as only soups that contain min 1 of the following: 30g fruit, vegetables, cereals, meat, 
                     fish, milk or any combination of those (calculated as fresh equivalent) per portion, are classified 
                     in this category. This is equivalent to ½ child’s portion of the above. For many soup products, it is 
                     very challenging to comply with this. 
                      
                     What’s in and what’s out? 
                         •   The saturated fats threshold is challenging for cheese, meat and cream containing soups 
                         •   For  many  soup  products,  it  is  very  difficult  to  comply  with  the  “components  to 
                             encourage” criteria 
                                                                            
                 46 See footnote 25 
                 47 ≤ 350 until end 2018 
                 48 ≤ 7.5 until end 2018 
                 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 40 
                  
                                                                                                                       
                  
                  Category 7: Soups, composite dishes, main course and filled sandwiches 
                   
                  Sub-category B: Composite dishes, main dishes, and filled sandwiches: all kinds of dishes and 
                                                                                     49
                  sandwiches containing min 2 of the following: 30g fruit, vegetables , cereals, meat, fish, milk or any 
                  combination of those (calculated as fresh equivalent) per portion. (Thresholds apply to food as 
                  reconstituted, ready for consumption, following manufacturer’s instructions). 
                                   Energy             Sodium          Saturated fat     Total sugars   Components to 
                  Examples         (kcal/portion*)    (mg/100g or     (g/100g or        (g/100g or     encourage 
                                                      100ml*)         100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                   *except where specified otherwise 
                  Pasta salad            < 425            < 400             < 5             < 7.5      Nutrients 
                  with                                                                                 delivered 
                  vegetables,                                                                          through 
                  noodles with                                                                         ingredients 
                  sauce, pizza,                                                                        (fruits and/or 
                  croque-                                                                              vegetables, 
                  monsieur,                                                                            cereals, meat, 
                  moussaka,                                                                            fish, milk) 
                  filled pancakes 
                 •   Product group: The product group includes all kinds of dishes and sandwiches containing min 2 
                     of the following: 30g fruit, vegetables, cereals, meat, fish, milk or any combination of those 
                     (calculated as fresh equivalent) per portion.  
                 •   Energy: Dishes should not contribute more than 25% of daily reference intake value for children 
                     (which corresponds to the threshold of 425kcal/portion). Reference portion is 200g.  
                 •   Sodium:  The  sodium  threshold  (400mg)  is  in  line  with  various  UK  Responsibility  Deal  2012 
                     targets  (400mg  for  pizza,  450mg  for  ready  meals;  high  salt  fillings  sandwiches:  400mg). 
                     Consumers will add salt when sodium content it is too low.  
                 •   Saturated fats: The threshold (5g) is suitable for this broad group of very different types of 
                     dishes. For a 425kcal dish this value would represent ~10% of energy coming from saturated fat. 
                 •   Total sugars: the threshold is set at 7.5g to allow dishes prepared from high sugar containing 
                     vegetables (e.g. beet root, sweet pepper, corn, tomato) to comply, and to stimulate (and not 
                     penalize) innovation towards high vegetable content dishes. For a 425kcal dish this value would 
                     represent ~7% of energy coming from sugars.  
                 •   Components to encourage: positive nutrients are delivered through the main ingredients of the 
                     dishes, as only these dishes that contain min 2 of the following: 30g fruit, vegetables, cereals, 
                     meat, fish, milk or any combination of those (calculated as fresh equivalent) per portion, are 
                     classified in this category. This is equivalent to ½ child’s portion of the above. 
                      
                     What’s in and what’s out? 
                         •   The sodium threshold is challenging for most composite dishes  especially for those 
                             containing cheese such as pizza, pasta gratins and croque-monsieur (if not reformulated) 
                         •   The saturated fats threshold is challenging for cheese, meat and cream containing 
                             products 
                  
                                                                            
                 49 See footnote 25 
                 EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                       Page 41 
                  
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                           
                                 8.  Meals 
                            Category 8: Meals: The combination of items served as meal (main dish, side item (s) and a beverage) 
                            for breakfast, lunch or dinner, or a small in-between meal defined as the combination of two or more 
                            components served as a snack, consumed apart from the three main meals  
                            Examples               Energy (kcal                Sodium (mg per                   Saturated fats               Total sugars            Components to 
                                                   per meal)                   meal)                            (g per meal*)                (g per meal)            encourage 
                                                                 a)                                                                                      50
                            Children’s                   ≤510                             ≤660                      ≤10% Kcal                      ≤18               Each meal must 
                            meals                        ≤340b)                                                 from saturated                    (minus             contain min. of: 
                                                                                                                         fats                    natural             1 portion d) 
                                                                                                                                               occurring             fruit/ 
                                                                                                                                                      c)                               51
                                                                                                                                             sugar   from  vegetables  
                                                                                                                                                              d)                        d)
                                                                                                                                              1 portion              or 1 portion  
                                                                                                                                              J/F/V/M/D)             100% juice 
                                                                                                                                                                     and/or 
                                                                                                                                                                     1 portion 
                                                                                                                                                                     qualified d,e) 
                                                                                                                                                                     dairy product or 
                                                                                                                                                                     milk 
                                                                                                                                                                     and/or 
                                                                                                                                                                     1 portion of 
                                                                                                                                                                                        f)
                                                                                                                                                                     whole grain  
                                                                 g) 
                            Children’s                   ≤170                   Each component                           Each                      Each              Each small in-
                            small in-                                           meets its specific                 component                  component              between meal 
                            between                                             category criteria                    meets its                  meets its            must contain 
                            meals                                                    for sodium                       specific                   specific            min. of:  
                                                                                                                     category                   category             ½ portion d) 
                                                                                                                    criteria for               criteria for          fruit/ vegetables  
                                                                                                                                                                                         d)
                                                                                                                 saturated fats                   sugars             or ½ portion  
                                                                                                                                                                     100% juice 
                                                                                                                                                                     and/or 
                                                                                                                                                                     plain water  
                                                                                                                                                                     and/or  
                                                                                                                                                                     ½ portion 
                                                                                                                                                                     qualified d,e) 
                                                                                                                                                                     dairy product or 
                                                                                                                                                                     milk  
                                                                                                                                                                     and/or  
                                                                                                                                                                     ½ portion of 
                                                                                                                                                                                        f)
                                                                                                                                                                     whole grain   
                                                                                                                                                                      
                           
                          Notes: 
                          a) For lunch/dinner (30% energy) 
                          b) For breakfast (20% energy) 
                          c) If sugar content is higher than 20g for a meal and contains more than 1 J/F/V/M/D. 
                          d) Portions are:           
                                 •     Fruits (F)/Vegetables (V): 60-80g 
                                 •     100% juice (J): 150-200ml (by end 2018) 
                                 •     Dairy (D): e.g. 30g cheese/100-150g yoghurt 
                                 •     Milk (M):  150-250ml 
                                                                                     
                          50 ≤ 20 until end 2018 
                          51 See footnote 25 
                          EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                                                               Page 42 
                           
                                                                                                                                     
                    
                   e) Meet individual category requirements 
                   f) Product qualified for a reasonable source of fiber which contains ≥ 8g whole grain per portion 
                   g)
                     For a small in-between Meal/snack (10% energy) 
                    
                   •   Product group: A Meal is defined as the combination of items served as meal (main dish, side 
                       item (s) and a beverage) for breakfast, lunch or dinner. Although there is not a commonly agreed 
                       upon reference for “meal” in the EU52, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
                       uses the following definition: a meal is a group of food that: 
                            (1) Makes a major contribution to the total diet by: 
                            (i) Weighing at least 10 ounces (oz) per labeled serving; and 
                            (ii) Containing not less than three 40-g portions of food, or combinations of foods, from two 
                            or more of the following four food groups, except as noted in paragraph (l)(1)(ii)(E) of this 
                            section: 
                            (A) Bread, cereal, rice, and pasta group; 
                            (B) Fruits and vegetables group; 
                            (C) Milk, yogurt, and cheese group; 
                            (D) Meat, poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs, and nuts group; except that; 
                            (E) These foods shall not be sauces (except for foods in the above four food groups that are 
                            in the sauces), gravies, condiments, relishes, pickles, olives, jams, jellies, syrups, breading or 
                            garnishes; and 
                            2) Is represented as, or is in a form commonly understood to be, a breakfast, lunch, dinner, 
                            or meal.  
                             
                            A small in-between Meal is defined as the combination of two or more components served 
                            as  a  snack,  consumed apart from the three main meals which are breakfast, lunch and 
                            dinner. 
                             
                   •   Energy: The thresholds of ≤510 kcal for a lunch or dinner meal and ≤340 kcal for a breakfast 
                       meal are based represent 30% of energy for lunch/dinner and 20% for breakfast of children’s 
                       daily reference value (1700 kcal), as set out in the Energy Values section above. 
                       The justification for the recommended thresholds is based on a nutrition science review and is 
                       aligned  with  EFSA’s  energy  opinion  for  girls  6-12yrs  (slightly  lower  than  for  boys  6-12yrs). 
                       Furthermore  the  McDonald’s  Europe  GDA  for  Kids  criteria,  used  for  the  company’s  own 
                       nutritional labeling were also taken into consideration.  As additional support and comparison, 
                       the US Institute of Medicine (IOM), and Dietary Guidelines nutrient levels were utilized as a tool 
                       for further justification. 
                                                                              
                   52 The European Commission’s 2009 draft nutrient profiles for the application of Article 4(1) of Regulation 1924/2006 on 
                   nutrition and health claims made on food does not refer to meals as a combination of different items. The LIVSFS- labeling 
                   system (Swedish key whole scheme) does not have details for meals (only ready to eat meals intended to be a main dish 
                   during breakfast, lunch or dinner, such as pizza, wraps, sandwiches, soups…). The Choices International Foundation only 
                   refers to main course/sandwich in a meal not to the whole meal. There is no meal category in the EUROFIR system. The 
                   EFSA-evaluation of the FoodEX food classification system (EFSA Journal 2011; 9(3) 1970 page 22) is proposing to add meals 
                   that contain a combination of ingredients, as this is not part of the 20 categories, but for the time being there is only 
                   reference to ready-to-eat products. The UK FSA nutrient profiling system does not refer to meals, but offers a scoring 
                   system with points for the specific nutrient content of 100 g of food or drink.  
                   EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                   Page 43 
                    
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                  •    The threshold of ≤170kcal for a small in-between meal aims at ensuring total energy 
                       consumption through the day remains below 1700kcal when combined with three main meals 
                       (30% of energy for lunch, 30% of energy for dinner and 20% of energy for breakfast). This cap is 
                       intended to support an appropriate energy intake from small in-between meal occasions to 
                       maintain overall energy intake within daily recommendations and its use for other policy 
                       objectives would not be appropriate. 
                        
                  •    Sodium, saturated fats and total sugar thresholds 
                           o  For children’s Meals: 
                                    ▪    Sodium:  WHO  recommendation  for  sodium/salt  is  a  maximum  intake  of  2g 
                                         sodium (5g salt) per day for an adult. The recommendation for children is to 
                                         adjust this value based on the energy requirements which is 1.7g sodium (4.3g 
                                         salt) per day considering an energy reference value of 1700 kcal. The European 
                                         Commission’s salt reference intake for adults is 6g, there is no value for children 
                                         available.  Due  to  the  limited  number  of  official  recommendations  for 
                                         salt/sodium intake available for children we base our calculation on SACN (UK) 
                                         data  and  their  rationale  to  take  real  consumption  into  consideration  (SACN 
                                         2003). The reference value for children aged 4-8 is 1.4g sodium per day (=3.5g 
                                         salt per day). Using the 1/3 reference value approach this would be a threshold 
                                         of  466mg  sodium  per  meal.    In  the  US,  the  IOM  School  Meals  sodium 
                                         recommendations are ≤ 640 mg for 5−9-year-olds and ≤ 710 mg for 10−13 year-
                                         olds for school lunches. To define a threshold for children’s meals that reinforces 
                                         the importance of lower sodium intake and supports further reduction steps, 
                                         but  also  reflects  reality,  a  combination  of  recommendations  along  with 
                                         communicated  values  in  different  profiling  systems  is  used.  (The  sodium 
                                         thresholds for different product categories, 300-400 mg/100g for main dishes, 
                                         fruits  and  vegetables,  dairy  products  have  been  applied.)  As  a  meal  is  a 
                                         combination of different items (main dish, side item(s) and beverage), including 
                                         fruits, vegetables, dairy products and juices or low-fat milk as a drink option, a 
                                         combined  threshold  seems  to  have  legitimacy.  On  this  basis,  the  chosen 
                                         threshold is ≤660mg sodium/meal. 
                                    ▪    Saturated fats: Based on WHO recommendations for daily intake of total fat and 
                                         SFA  there  is  a  common  understanding  and  alignment  in  nearly  all  scientific 
                                         publications, profiling systems and recommendations that the daily intake for 
                                         SFA should be ≤10% of energy. There is no difference in recommendations for 
                                         children  or  adults.  This  recommendation  was  taken  as  justification  for  the 
                                         defined threshold ≤10% of energy (for the individual meal).  
                                    ▪    Total sugars: In the absence of quantitative guidelines for intake of total sugar 
                                         for  children  in  Europe,  we  decided to align with the UK Institute of Grocery 
                                         Distribution (IGD) approach to calculate the reference value for total sugar on a 
                                         typical day intake of sugar. Following WHO recommendations for a typical diet 
                                         (different portions of fruits, vegetables, dairy….) this would be about 20% of 
                                         Energy as a reference intake for total sugar, also for kids. For a 1700 kcal diet, 
                                         this would be 85g sugar per day. This is in line with the NSG recommendation. 
                                         The “Meal” category works with a threshold of ≤20g of total sugars.  In order to 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 44 
                   
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                                         achieve a further reduction the sugar threshold will be reduced by 10% to ≤ 18g 
                                         by end 2018. Excluded from this limit are sugars from food groups to encourage 
                                         (if needed).  This is in an effort to encourage the use of these food groups with 
                                         beneficial  nutrients  to  children.  The  naturally  occurring  sugars  from  ONE 
                                         qualifying dairy, fruit without added sugars and fruit/vegetable juices or blends 
                                         with no added sugars will not be counted toward the total sugar limit.  
                           o  For children’s small in-between Meals: Each component must meet the specific criteria 
                                defined in this White Paper for their respective category.  
                                 
                  •    Components to encourage: To be consistent with and to fully support dietary guidelines and 
                       qualitative recommendations for balanced diets for children: 
                                    o  Each  Meal  contains  minimum:  1  portion  fruit/vegetables  or  a  mix  of  both 
                                         and/or  1  portion  100%  juice  and/or  1  portion  qualified  (meet  category 
                                         requirements) dairy product or low fat milk and/or 1 portion of whole grain 
                                         product. The food groups to encourage will add essential vitamins, minerals and 
                                         fiber, which are known to be lacking in many children’s daily diets.  
                                    o  Each small in-between Meal contains minimum: ½ portion fruit/vegetables or a 
                                         mix of  both  or  ½  portion  100%  juice,  and/or  plain  water,  and/or  ½  portion 
                                         qualified (meet category requirement) dairy products or milk, and/or ½ portion 
                                         of whole grain product.  
                  Rationales for portion sizes for food groups to encourage: 
                           •    Portion of fruit/vegetable: It was agreed that 100% fruit and vegetable products are 
                                exempted from any category/threshold system and can be advertised to children under 
                                12 without restrictions. Following the recommendations for balanced diets for children, 
                                we feel it is necessary to have portion size guidance. There is a need for a minimum 
                                portion size. As fruits add sugar a recommendation of an upper limit is also given. The 
                                UK (FSA) 5 a day recommendation for adults indicates a portion size of 80g for fruit and 
                                vegetables.  For  children  0-6  years  a  portion  size  of  60g  is  recommended,  for  older 
                                children the same 80g as for adults.  FDA/USDA definitions of serving size for fruit and 
                                vegetables  are  ½  cup.  The  “Meal”  category  therefore  defines  a  portion  of  fruit  or 
                                vegetable 60-80g, the small in-between meal category defines half a portion.  
                           •    Portion  of  100%  juice:  It  was  agreed  that  100%  juices  are  exempted  from  any 
                                category/threshold  system  and  can  be  advertised  to  children  under  12  without 
                                restrictions. The UK (FDA) 5 a day recommendation indicates a portions size of 150ml of.  
                                FDA/USDA definitions of serving size for juice is 1 cup. The “Meal” category defines a 
                                portion of juice 150ml-200ml, the small in-between meal category defines half a portion.  
                                These are also volumes offered as servings in glasses and “portion” bottles.  
                           •    Portion of qualified dairy product or milk: Qualified dairy products or milk products 
                                have to meet the individual category requirements. There is a need for a minimum 
                                portions size. FDA/USDA recommendation is e.g. max 1oz of cheese, max 8oz of milk and 
                                max 6oz of yoghurt. The “Meal” category defines a portion of milk 150ml-250ml. For 
                                dairy  products  examples  are:  max  30g  cheese  or  100-150g  yoghurt.  These  are  also 
                                volumes offered pre-packed. The small in-between meal category defines half a portion. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 45 
                   
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                           •    Portion of whole grain: The work done by the US Whole Grains Council was taken as 
                                reference and provides an excellent overview on the existing definitions of whole grain 
                                and portion sizes. The “Meal” category defines a product qualified for a reasonable 
                                source of fiber which contains ≥ 8g whole grain. The small in-between meal category 
                                defines half a portion. 
                   
                    What’s in and what’s out? 
                    For children’s meals: 
                    •   Only meals specifically designed for children comply 
                    •   Among these, only some qualify, e.g.: 4 Chicken Nuggets, Cherry tomatoes and orange Juice; 
                        Hamburger, Fruit bag and orange juice; Fish fingers, Small Fries and Mineral Water. 
                    •   Meals such as Hamburger, French Fries and Soft drink or even Mineral water; or any meal 
                        combination with Cheeseburger do not qualify. 
                    For small in-between meals: 
                    •   Only small in-between meals (snacks) specifically designed for children comply 
                    •   Only food items compliant with their respective category thresholds will be able to be offered as 
                        part of small in-between meals. Thresholds in each existing category are challenging for many 
                        products (see included and excluded products list for each category). 
                   
                   
                                                       
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 46 
                   
                                                                                                                                  
                   
                       9.  Edible ices 
                                  Category 9: Edible ices: all kinds of edible ices (water ices and ice cream) 
                   Examples        Energy            Sodium               Saturated         Total sugars         Components 
                                   (kcal/portion*)   (mg/100g or          fats (g/100g or   (g/100g or           to encourage 
                                                     100ml*)              100ml*)           100ml*) 
                                   *except where specified otherwise 
                   Ice cream,           < 110              < 120                < 5                < 20                 - 
                   water ice, 
                   ice lollies, 
                   sherbet ice 
                  •    Product group: The product group includes all kinds of edible ices (water ices and ice cream). An 
                       edible ice category was created on the grounds that compliant products are responsible treats 
                       with a controlled and suitable energy content. Portion sizes are limited through the energy 
                       criterion.  These  products are  no  alternatives  for  dairy  or  fruit,  and  therefore  should  not  be 
                       classified as such.  
                  •    Energy:  The  threshold  (110kcal/portion)  is  the  same  value  as  applied  for  snacks  in  the 
                       International Choices Programme (Roodenburg et al. 2011). This value represents 6.5% of the 
                       reference  daily  intake  for  children  (1700kcal).  These  are  occasional  products,  with  a  low 
                       contribution to the daily energy intake. This 110kcal threshold is lower than the 10% (170kcal) 
                       energy cap used elsewhere, as for this product group no nutrients to encourage are defined. 
                       Portion size is limited by the energy threshold.  
                  •    Sodium: For this product group, sodium is not considered to be relevant. The EU value for “low 
                       sodium” is applied, to allow a margin for inclusions. 
                  •    Saturated fats: Both SAFA and sugar are important for technological properties: creaminess, 
                       taste,  physical  stability,  softness.  Through  innovation  industry  tries  to  maintain these 
                       properties while using less SAFA and sugar. Saturated fat is important for the creamy texture 
                       and the creation of the whipped structural network and plays a major role for structure stability: 
                       the setting point of the used fats dictates the crystallization process of the fat to obtain a stable 
                       ice cream. 
                  •    Total sugars: The sugar threshold (20g) is in line with the Choices International criterion for 
                       snacks (Roodenburg et al. 2011). Such a sugar criterion prevents high sugar-content ices from 
                       qualifying  and  ensures  that  daily  intake  of  added  sugar  could  not  exceed  maximum  daily 
                       recommendations (<25% energy) as set by the US Institute of Medicine (IOM 2005). Sugar has 
                       technical properties that are essential for the structural characteristics of both water ices and ice 
                       creams. It is essential for the control of ice crystal formation and the lowering of freezing point. 
                  •    Components to encourage: Positive contribution is very challenging for the category as the 
                       presence of a main food group is low and serving sizes are small. These products have controlled 
                       levels of energy, SAFA and sugar. 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                Page 47 
                   
                                                                                                         
                
               References  
               AFSSA  2009.  Les  Agences  françaises  de  sécurité  sanitaire:  le  Bateau  Alimentaire. 
               http://www.lexpress.fr/informations/le-bateau-alimentaire_641424.html    
               Conseil Supérieur d’Hygiène 2009. Conseil Supérieur d’Hygiène. Recommandations nutritionnelles 
               pour la Belgique   https://portal.health.fgov.be 
                
               DGE  2000.  Deutsche  Gesellschaft  für  Ernährung,  Österreichisch  Gesellschaft  für  Ernährung, 
               Schweizerische  Vereinigung  für  Ernährung.  (2000).  Referenzwerte  für  die  Nährstoffzufuhr.  1. 
               Auflage. Umschau/Braus. Frankfurt. 
                
               DGE  2005.  Deutsche  Gesellschaft  fur  Ernahrung,  Die  Dreidimensionale  Lebensmittelpyramide. 
               http://www.dge.de/  last accessed October 2009 (Germany) 
                
               DHHS 2010. US Department of Health and Human Services, Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010. 
               DoH 1991. Department of Health. (1991). Dietary Reference Values for Food Energy and Nutrients 
               for  the  United  Kingdom. Report of  the  panel on  dietary  reference values of  the  committee on 
               medical aspects of food policy. London: HSMO. 
               EFSA 2008. Scientific Opinion of the Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies, on The 
               setting of nutrient profiles for foods bearing nutrition and health claims pursuant to Article 4 of the 
               Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. 
                
               EFSA 2013. Scientific Opinion on Dietary References Values for energy. EFSA Journal 2013; 11(1): 
               3005. 
               Eurodiet 2001. Nutrition and diet for healthy lifestyles in Europe: the Eurodiet evidence. Public 
               Health Nutrition, vol. 4, 2(A) and 2 (B). 
                
               European Commission 2010. Strategy for Europe on nutrition, overweight and obesity related health 
               issues. http://ec.europa.eu/health/nutrition_physical_activity/docs/implementation_report_en.pdf 
                
               European Commission 2012.  First Report from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
               Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the 
               application  of  Directive  2010/13/EU  "Audiovisual  Media  Service  Directive.  COM(2012)  203  final 
               http://ec.europa.eu/avpolicy/reg/tvwf/implementation/reports/index_en.htm  
                
               EUFIC  2012.  Review  01/2012:  Fruit  and  vegetable  consumption  in  Europe  –  do  Europeans  get 
               enough?  (http://www.eufic.org/article/en/expid/Fruit-vegetable-consumption-Europe/  accessed 
               June 2012) 
                
               Food  Standards  Agency  2007.    Nutrient  and  food  based  guidelines  for  UK  institutions. 
               http://www.food.gov.uk/multimedia/pdfs/nutrientinstitution.pdf 
                
               FSAI 1999. Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (1999). Recommended dietary allowances for Ireland. 
               http://www.fsai.ie/publications/reports/recommended_dietary_allowances_ireland_1999.pdf 
                (http://extranet.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43144/1/9241592826_eng.pdf, accessed June 2012) 
                
               Gezondheidsraad      2006.      Guidelines     for      a      healthy     diet     2006. 
               http://www.gr.nl/samenvatting.php?ID=1481 
                
               EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                            Page 48 
                
                                                                                                                     
                 
                Harika et al. 2011. Harika RK, Cosgrove MC, Osendarp SJ, Verhoef P, Zock PL. Fatty acid intakes of 
                children  and  adolescents  are  not  in  line  with  the  dietary  intake  recommendations  for  future 
                cardiovascular health: a systematic review of dietary intake data from thirty countries. Br J Nutr 
                2011 Aug;106(3):307-16  
                 
                HMH 2009. Supreme Scientific Health Council. Hellenic Ministry of Health. Dietary guidelines for 
                adults in Greece. 
                 
                IGD 2005. Industry Grocery Distribution (2005). Report of the IGD/PIC industry nutrition strategy 
                group-technical  working  group  on  guideline  daily  amounts  (GDAs).  Review  of  existing  and 
                development of new GDAs: decisions and rationale.  
                 
                IOM 2005.  Institute  of  Medicine  of  the  National  Academies.  Food  and  Nutrition  Board  (2005). 
                Dietary references intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fibre, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and 
                amino     acids   (Macronutrients).    The    national    academies     press,   Washington     DC. 
                http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10490.html 
                 
                Martin 2001. Martin A. 2001. Apports nutritionnels conseillés pour la population française. 3ème 
                édition. CNERNA-CNRS-AFSSA. Editions TEC & DOC, Paris. 605 p. 
                 
                MFF 2009. Ministeriet for familieog for forbrugeranliggender; Kostråd og Kostkompasset (Denmark)  
                 
                MHH 2001. Ministry of Health of Hungary Dietary Guidelines to the Adult population of Hungary.  
                ftp://ftp.fao.org/es/esn/nutrition/dietary_guidelines/hun.pdf  
                 
                Mozaffarian 2010. Mozaffarian D, Micha R, Wallace S (2010) Effects on Coronary Heart Disease of 
                Increasing Polyunsaturated Fat in Place of Saturated Fat: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 
                Randomized Controlled Trials. PLoS Med 7(3): e1000252. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000252 
                 
                NNC 2005 National Nutrition Council; Finnish Nutrition Recommendations 2005.  
                 
                Roodenburg et al 2011: AJC Roodenburg, BM Popkin and JC Seidell. Development of international 
                criteria for a front of package food labelling system: the International Choices Programme. EUR J Clin 
                Nutr. 22 June 2011; 65: 1190-1200 
                 
                Roodenburg  et  al  2011  bis:  Choices  EU  database:  Appendix  3,  supplementary  material  to  AJC 
                Roodenburg, BM Popkin and JC Seidell. Development of international criteria for a front of package 
                food labelling system: the International Choices Programme. EUR J Clin Nutr. 22 June 2011; 65: 
                1190-1200. 
                 
                SACN 2003. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. Salt and Health. London (2003).  
                www.sacn.gov.uk/pdfs.sacn_salt_final.pdf 
                 
                SACN  2011.  Scientific  Advisory  Committee  on  Nutrition.  Dietary  Reference  Values  for  Energy. 
                London, TSO. 2012. 
                 
                Standing Nordic Committee on Foods. (2004). Nordic Nutrition Recommendations 2004, 4th Edition. 
                http://www.norden.org/pub/velfaerd/livsmedel/sk/N2004013.pdf   
                 
                Torun  1997.  Torun  B.  (1997).  Energy  requirements  of  children  and  adolescents.  Public  Health 
                Nutrition, 8 (7A), 968-993. 
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                      Page 49 
                 
                                                                                                               
                 
                VIG 2009. Vlaams Instituut voor Gezondheidspromotie; De actieve voedingsdriehoek.  
                 
                WHO 2003. Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a joint  
                WHO/FAO expert consultation, Geneva, 28 January-1 February 2002. WHO technical report series 
                916. 
                 
                WHO, 2003 bis. Food based dietary guidelines in the WHO European region:  
                http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/150083/E79832.pdf 
                 
                WHO 2004. Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health. 
                 http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/strategy/eb11344/strategy_english_web.pdf  
                 
                WHO 2005: Agudo, A (2004) Measuring intake of fruit and vegetables. Background paper for the 
                joint FAO/WHO workshop on fruit and vegetables for health. 
                 
                WHO Unpublished. Guiding Principles and Framework Manual for the development or adaptation of 
                nutrient profile models, First Edition. Unedited Final Draft, 22 February 2011 
                 
                                               
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                 Page 50 
                 
                                                                                                               
                 
                Annex I: Energy values 
                Energy values used in the EU Pledge Nutrition Criteria are calculated as a percentage of reference 
                intake values. It is important to note that quantitative guidelines for children are not numerous. 
                Nutritional needs for children aged 1-12 are not comprehensively researched, especially not if they 
                are not clearly linked to a risk of obesity and chronic diseases.  
                For the 2012 EU Pledge White Paper, our estimation of energy needs of children was based on the 
                US  Dietary  Reference  Intakes  (DRI)  (IOM  2005)  which  recommended  daily  energy  needs  of 
                moderately active boys and girls of the age groups 1-2 years, 3-8 years and 9-13 years. We checked 
                the legitimacy of this average value by looking at recommendations for energy intake published by 
                European countries (DoH 1991, FSAI 1999, DGE 2000, Eurodiet 2001, Martin 2001, Standing Nordic 
                Committee  on  Foods  2004,  Conseil  Supérieur  de  l’Hygiène  2009,  Gezondheidsraad  2006).  The 
                average energy requirement for children of 4-8 years of age inclusive was calculated to be 1770 
                kcal/d, close to the 1700 kcal/d value calculated for children aged 3-8 using US DRI. 
                In 2013, EFSA released a Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for energy which provides 
                estimated daily energy levels for children and adolescents aged 1 to 17 with Physical Activity Level 
                (PAL) of 1.4, 1.6, 1.8 and 2.0, which approximately reflect sedentary, moderately active, active and 
                very active lifestyles. 
                                               
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                 Page 51 
                 
                                                                                                               
                 
                Summary of Average Requirement (AR) for energy for children and adolescents (Scientific Opinion 
                on Dietary Reference Values for energy, EFSA, 2013) 
                                                                                                     
                EFSA sets reference intakes for 4 to 11 years old with moderate physical activity level (PAL) 1.6 from 
                1335kcal to 2043kcal. Using these AR levels and calculating the averages for moderate activity PAL 
                1.6, the average energy intakes in boys and girls aged 4 to 11 are respectively 1740 and 1622 
                kcal/day, which results in an average value of 1681 kcal/day.  
                Given that the EU Pledge commitment concerns all children up to the age of 12, the chosen value of 
                1700 kcal/day is aligned with EFSA’s opinion. 
                                               
                EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                 Page 52 
                 
                                                                                                                                   
                   
                  Annex II: Key reference documents 
                  The following sources are not necessarily referenced in the White Paper, but were consulted for the 
                  purposes of the informing the work of the EU Pledge Nutrition Working group: 
                  •    Choices International Foundation, Brussels (2011). www.choicesprogramme.org  
                        
                  •    DHHS 2010. US Department of Health and Human Services, Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
                       2010 
                        
                  •    EFSA 2008. Scientific Opinion of the Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies, on The 
                       setting of nutrient profiles for foods bearing nutrition and health claims pursuant to Article 4 of 
                       the Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. 
                        
                  •    EFSA 2011. EFSA Report on the development of a Food Classification and Description System for 
                       exposure assessment and guidance on its implementation and use.  
                        
                  •    EFSA 2011. Evaluation of the FoodEx, the food classification system applied to the development 
                       of the EFSA Comprehensive European Food Consumption Database. Eurodiet 2001. Nutrition 
                       and diet for healthy lifestyles in Europe: the Eurodiet evidence. Public Health Nutrition, vol. 4, 
                       2(A) and 2 (B). 
                        
                  •    European Commission 2009. Working Document on the Setting of Nutrient Profiles, March 2009, 
                       unofficial draft. 
                        
                  •    EUROFIR Food Classification system 
                   
                  •    LIVSFS 2009. Swedish National Food Administration’s Regulations on the Use of a Particular 
                       Symbol (Keyhole system). 
                       http://www.slv.se/upload/nfa/documents/food_regulations/Nyckelh%c3%a5l_dec_2009_6%20
                       eng.pdf  
                   
                  •    SACN 2011. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. Dietary Reference Values for Energy. 
                       London, TSO. 2012. 
                   
                  •    SACN 2003. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. Salt and Health. London (2003). 
                       www.sacn.gov.uk/pdfs.sacn_salt_final.pdf 
                   
                  •    UK Food standards Agency nutrient profiling system. 
                       http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/documents/digitalasset/dh_1
                       23492.pdf  
                   
                  •    UK Public Health Responsibility Deal: http://responsibilitydeal.dh.gov.uk/  
                   
                  •    US Children’s Food & Beverage Advertising Initiative White Paper on Uniform Nutrition Criteria. 
                       Better Business Bureau, July 2011 
                   
                  •    WHO Technical Report 916 on Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases. 2003. 
                   
                  •    WHO Europe Food and Nutrient policy for schools (2006) 
                   
                  •    WHO Unpublished. Guiding Principles and Framework Manual for the development or 
                       adaptation of nutrient profile models, First Edition. Unedited Final Draft, 22 February 2011 
                  EU Pledge Nutrition White Paper – Updated October 2018                                                 Page 53 
                   
