       
                              
               Patient information leaflet 
                              
              Department of Gynaecology Services 
        Whiston Hospital, Warrington Road, Prescot L35 5DR 
                              
                  Lichen Sclerosus in Women 
                              
                              
      What is lichen sclerosus?  
       
      Lichen sclerosus is a chronic inflammatory skin condition which can affect 
      any part of the skin, but in females it most often affects the vulval skin and 
      the skin around the anus. It can start in childhood or adulthood and affect 
      girls or women of any age.  
       
      What causes lichen sclerosus?  
       
      The cause of lichen sclerosus is not fully understood. It is felt to be a type 
      of autoimmune condition in which the person’s immune system reacts 
      against the skin for no obvious reason.  
       
      Lichen sclerosus is not due to an infection – the disease is not contagious, 
      so sexual partners cannot pick it up.  
       
      Friction or damage to the skin can bring out lichen sclerosus and make it 
      worse.  
       
      Is lichen sclerosus hereditary?  
       
      Rarely, lichen sclerosus can occur in relatives.  
       
      What are the symptoms of lichen sclerosus?  
       
      Many patients have none, but the most common symptom of lichen 
      sclerosus is itching. As a rule the patches on the general skin surface 
      seldom itch much, but those in the genital area do, and can also be sore if 
      the skin breaks down or cracks. In the genital area, the scar-like process 
      can tighten the skin, and this can interfere with urination and with sexual 
                             1 
       
      intercourse. Tightening of the skin around the anus can lead to problems 
      with constipation.  
       
      What does lichen sclerosus look like?  
       
      In females the most common site of involvement is the vulval skin. The skin 
      has a white shiny appearance which can sometimes become raised and 
      thickened. Skin fragility may lead to easy bruising and blisters. There is a 
      very small risk of developing a skin cancer in affected areas in the vulva. 
      These can look like lumps, ulcers or crusted areas.  
       
      In areas away from the genital skin, lichen sclerosus looks like small ivory-
      coloured slightly raised areas, which can join up to form white patches. 
      After a while the surface of the spots can look like white wrinkled tissue 
      paper.  
       
      How will lichen sclerosus be diagnosed?  
       
      The diagnosis of lichen sclerosus can usually be made from the typical 
      appearance of the condition. Sometimes a very small skin sample may be 
      taken and checked under the microscope to confirm the diagnosis, 
      especially if there is an open sore or a thickened area of skin. This is known 
      as a skin biopsy and requires a local anaesthetic injection and possibly 
      stitches to close the wound, leading to a small scar. If this is required, your 
      doctor will discuss this with you. 
       
      Can lichen sclerosus be cured?  
       
      No treatment is likely to reverse the changes of lichen sclerosus completely, 
      but the symptoms and signs of the disease can usually be well controlled 
      with the application of creams to the affected skin. Occasionally it may go 
      away around the time of puberty.  
       
      How can lichen sclerosus be treated?  
       
      A variety of treatments are available for lichen sclerosus:  
        Strong steroid ointments such as clobetasol propionate (Dermovate®) 
       and diflucortolone valerate (Nerisone forte®) are used to stop the 
       inflammation and also soften the affected skin. Please do not worry 
       about the warning inside the pack, where it might say not to use these 
       ointments on genital skin - your doctor will advise you how and when to 
       apply the steroid ointments safely.  
                         2 
       
        Moisturisers help to soften and protect the skin.  
        The fragile skin of lichen sclerosus may be more susceptible than normal 
       skin to infection with Candida yeasts (thrush) or bacteria, and may split 
       or even bleed. Your doctor will treat these problems if they arise.  
        Rarely, a small operation may be needed to divide adhesions (where the 
       skin sticks together).  
       
      Self-Care  
       
        Avoid washing with soap and instead use an emollient soap substitute/ 
       cream.  
        Carefully dry yourself after passing urine to reduce the contact of urine 
       with your skin.  
        Using a moisturiser or yellow soft paraffin as a barrier cream can protect 
       your skin from exposure to urine.  
        If sexual intercourse is painful because of tightening at the entrance to 
       the vagina, the use of lubricants and, on occasions, vaginal dilators, will 
       help. Vaginal dilators can be bought over the counter at large 
       pharmacies. 
        Keep an eye on your skin. Cancer of the vulva may be a little more likely 
       to occur in lichen sclerosus that has been present for many years than in 
       normal skin. Lifelong regular self-examination is very important for all 
       females who have or have had genital lichen sclerosus. If any skin 
       change develops which does not respond to steroid creams, in particular 
       any skin thickening, soreness or ulceration lasting more than two weeks, 
       you need to tell your GP without delay. You may need a biopsy to test 
       for skin cancer.  
        If you are a smoker, stop smoking to reduce the risk of cancer.  
       
      Where can I get more information about lichen sclerosus?  
       
      Web links to detailed leaflets:  
        www.niams.nih.gov/Health_Info/Lichen_Sclerosus/default.asp  
        http://dermnetnz.org/immune/lichen-sclerosus.html 
         
       
      Patient support group:  
        National Lichen Sclerosus Support Group (NLSSG)  
        E-mail: admin@lichensclerosus.org  
        Web: www.lichensclerosus.org 
                         3 
       
       
      Published guidelines for the management of lichen sclerosus:  
        British Journal of Dermatology 2010; 163:672-82  
        For details of source materials use please contact the Clinical Standards 
       Unit (clinicalstandards@bad.org.uk).  
       
       
      Acknowledgement - information has been sourced from the British Society 
      of Dermatologists information leaflet 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
      This leaflet can be made available in alternative languages/formats on 
      request. 
      如有需要，本传单可提供其他语言/版式 
      此單張的其他語言/格式版本可按要求提供 
      Na żądanie ta ulotka może zostać udostępniona w innych 
      językach/formatach. 
       
       
      Version 1 
      Creation date – February 2017 
      Next Review date – February 2020 
      Produced by Department of Gynaecology Services 
                         4 
