                               The Health and Safety Executive’s Five steps to risk assessment  
                                                                                                             
                           Step 1: Identify the hazards 
                                        Walk around your venue and look at what could reasonably be expected to cause 
                                        harm. 
                                        Ask your other people what they think. They may have noticed things that are not 
                                        immediately obvious to you.  
                                        Visit the HSE website. HSE publishes practical guidance on where hazards occur 
                                        and how to control them. There is much information on the hazards that might affect 
                                        your event. 
                                        If  you  are  a  member  of  a  trade  association,  contact  them.  Many  produce  very 
                                        helpful guidance. 
                                        Check manufacturers’ instructions or data sheets for chemicals and equipment as 
                                        they can be very helpful in spelling out the hazards and putting them in their true 
                                        perspective. 
                                        Remember to think about long-term hazards to health (eg high levels of noise or 
                                        exposure to harmful substances) as well as safety hazards.  
                           Step 2: Decide who might be harmed and how 
                           For each hazard you need to be clear about who might be harmed; it will help you identify 
                           the best way of managing the risk. That doesn’t mean listing everyone by name, but rather 
                           identifying groups of people (eg ‘people working in the storeroom’ or ‘passers-by’). 
                           Remember: 
                                        some workers have particular requirements, eg new and young workers                                                                   , migrant 
                                        workers             ,  new  or  expectant  mothers  and  people  with  disabilities  may  be  at 
                                        particular risk. Extra thought will be needed for some hazards; 
                                        cleaners,  visitors,  contractors,  maintenance  workers  etc,  who  may  not  be  in  the 
                                        venue  all the time; 
                                        members of the public, if they could be hurt by your activities; 
                                        ask others if they can think of anyone you may have missed. 
                           In each case, identify how they might be harmed, i.e. what type of injury or ill health might 
                           occur. For example, ‘shelf stackers may suffer back injury from repeated lifting of boxes’. 
                           Step 3: Evaluate the risks and decide on precautions 
                           Having spotted the hazards, you then have to decide what to do about them. The law 
                           requires you to do everything ‘reasonably practicable’ to protect people from harm. You can 
                           work this out for yourself, but the easiest way is to compare what you are doing with good 
                           practice. 
                           First, look at what you’re already doing, think about what controls you have in place and how 
                           it is organised. Then compare this with the good practice and see if there’s more you should 
                           be doing to bring yourself up to standard. In asking yourself this, consider: 
                                        Can I get rid of the hazard altogether? 
                                        If not, how can I control the risks so that harm is unlikely? 
                           When controlling risks, apply the principles below, if possible in the following order: 
                                        try a less risky option (eg switch to using a less hazardous chemical); 
                                        prevent access to the hazard (eg by guarding); 
                                        organise work to reduce exposure to the hazard (eg put barriers between pedestrians 
                                        and traffic); 
                                        issue personal protective equipment (eg clothing, footwear, goggles etc); and 
                                        provide  welfare  facilities  (eg  first  aid  and  washing  facilities  for  removal  of 
                                        contamination). 
                           Improving  health  and  safety  need  not  cost  a  lot.  For  instance,  placing  a  mirror  on  a 
                           dangerous  blind  corner  to  help  prevent  vehicle  accidents  is  a  low-cost  precaution 
                           considering  the  risks.  Failure  to  take  simple  precautions  can  cost  you  a  lot  more  if  an 
                           accident does happen. 
                           Step 4: Record your findings and implement them 
                           Putting the results of your risk assessment into practice will make a difference when looking 
                           after people and your fundraising event. 
                           Writing down the results of your risk assessment, and sharing them, encourages you to do 
                           this.  
                           When writing down your results, keep it simple, for example ‘Tripping over rubbish: bins 
                           provided, staff instructed, weekly housekeeping checks’. 
                           We do not expect a risk assessment to be perfect, but it must be suitable and sufficient. As 
                           illustrated by our example risk assessments, you need to be able to show that: 
                                        a proper check was made;  
                                        you asked who might be affected;  
                                        you dealt with all the obvious significant hazards, taking into account the number of 
                                        people who could be involved;  
                                        the precautions are reasonable, and the remaining risk is low; and  
                                        you involved your staff or their representatives in the process.  
                           Step 5: Review your risk assessment and update if 
                           necessary 
                           Things  are  likely  to  change  between  first  conducting  your  risk  assessment  and  your 
                           fundraising event. It makes sense therefore, to review what you are doing on an ongoing 
                           basis. 
                           Look at your risk assessment and think about whether there have been any changes? Are 
                           there improvements you still need to make? Have other people spotted a problem? Have 
                           you learnt anything from accidents or near misses? Make sure your risk assessment stays 
                           up to date. 
                            
