       Running head: SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS      1
           Sample APA Paper for Students Interested in Learning APA Style 6th Edition
                       Jeffrey H. Kahn
                      Illinois State University
                        Author Note
          Jeffrey H. Kahn, Department of Psychology, Illinois State University.
          Correspondence concerning this sample paper should be addressed to Jeffrey H. Kahn,
       Department of Psychology, Illinois State University, Campus Box 4620, Normal, Illinois
       61790-4620. E-mail: jhkahn@ilstu.edu.
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    2
                         Abstract
       The abstract should be a single paragraph in block format (without paragraph indentation), and
       the appropriate length depends on the journal to which you are submitting, but they are typically
       between 150 and 200 words. (Students should consult their instructor for the recommended
       length of the abstract.) Section 2.04 of the APA manual (American Psychological Association
       [APA], 2010) has additional information about the abstract. The abstract is important because
       many journal readers first read the abstract to determine if the entire article is worth reading. The
       abstract should describe all four parts of an empirical paper (i.e., Introduction, Method, Results,
       and Discussion). Consider writing one or two sentences summarizing each part of a paper, and
       you’ll have a nice abstract.
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    3
             Sample APA Paper for Students Interested in Learning APA Style
          Before getting started you will notice some things about this paper. First, everything is
       double-spaced. Second, margins are 1-inch wide on all sides. Third, there are several headings
       used throughout to separate different parts of the paper; some of the headings are in bold. Fourth,
       there is exactly one space after each punctuation mark (except for periods at the end of a
       sentence, after which there are two spaces). Fifth, the upper left of each page has a running head
       in all capital letters, and the upper right has the page number. Try to pay attention to all of these
       details as you look through this paper.
          Now that those details are out of the way, you should know that this first part of the paper
       is called the “Introduction” section, yet it does not have a heading that actually says
       “Introduction.” Instead, the title of the paper is typed at the top of the first page (be sure to center
       the title, but do not put it in bold). In this section you would often start with a topic paragraph
       that introduces the problem under study. The importance of the topic should be pretty clear from
       the first paragraph or two of the Introduction. Section 2.05 of the APA manual (APA, 2010) will
       help give you some ideas about how to write this.
          The bulk of the Introduction section is background literature on the topic. Here a
       literature review is often very helpful to provide a theoretical or empirical basis for the research.
       Try to provide the reader with enough information on the topic to be able to conclude that the
       research is important and that the hypotheses are reasonable. Any prior work on the topic would
       be useful to include here, although prior work that is most directly related to the hypotheses
       would be of greatest value.
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    4
          Remember to cite your sources often in the Introduction and throughout the manuscript.
       Articles and books are cited the same way in the text, yet they appear different on the References
       page. For example, an article by Cronbach and Meehl (1955) and a book by Bandura (1986) are
       written with the authors’ names and the year of the publication in parentheses. However, if you
       look on the References page they look a little different. Remember that APA style does not use
       footnotes or anything like that for citations. Two other things about citations are important. When
       a citation is written inside parentheses (e.g., Cronbach & Meehl, 1959), an ampersand is used
       between authors’ names instead of the word “and.” Second, when citing an author’s work using
       quotations, be sure to include a page number. For example, Rogers (1961) once wrote that two
       important elements of a helping relationship are “genuineness and transparency” (p. 37). Notice
       that the page number is included here. Unless a direct quote is taken from a source, the page
       number is not included. 
          The last section of the Introduction states the purpose of the research. The purpose can
       usually be summarized in a few sentences. Hypotheses are also included here at the end of this
       section. State your hypotheses as predictions (e.g., “I predicted that...”), and try to avoid using
       passive tense (e.g., “It was predicted that...”). You will notice that hypotheses are written in past
       tense because you are describing a study you have finished. 
                         Method
          The Method section is the second of four main parts of an empirical paper (see Section
       2.06 of the APA [2010] manual). (Be aware that some papers are reviews of the literature and
       therefore would not have a separate Method section.) There are typically three or four major
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    5
       subsections in the Method although there can be more. These subsections are separated by
       headings which are described in sections 3.02 and 3.03 of the APA manual (APA, 2010). 
       Participants 
          This brief section describes the people who participated in your study. (They should be
       called “participants,” not “subjects,” by the way.) Mention the number of participants, the
       percentage of female and male participants, the mean age (where “mean” is abbreviated M), and
       their ethnicity or cultural background. Any other demographic information would be appropriate
       here. 
       Research Design
          Experimental studies often have a section in the Method describing the design of the
       study. Typically the independent variables in the study would be described here. For example, the
       study might involve a 2-by-2 design with one independent variable being treatment/control
       conditions and the other independent variable being biological sex. It would be helpful to
       describe dependent variables in this subsection as well. 
       Measures 
          This section describes the tests or instruments used to collect data. It would be
       appropriate to describe any questionnaires that you used. For example, if you used the Marlowe-
       Crowne Social Desirability Scale in your research, you may say that the Marlowe-Crowne Social
       Desirability Scale (MCSD; Crowne & Marlowe, 1960) comprises 33 true-false items that
       measure social desirability. You would also provide the reader with information regarding the
       MCSD scores’ reliability and validity. Do this for each and every measure used in the study. In
       the event that the purpose of your paper is to develop a new questinnaire, you may wish to
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    6
       describe reliability and validity in the Results section (see below). However, you would only do
       this for a scale-development project. 
       Procedure 
          This section describes in great detail the data-collection procedures. Describe how
       participants were recruited, whether they participated alone or in groups, how informed consent
       or assent was obtained, what they were asked to do, how they were compensated for their
       participation, etc. It is hard to make this section too detailed. You should describe the procedure
       in a way that another researcher could conduct the same study (i.e., replicate it) just by reading
       about the procedure. 
                         Results
          The Results section may be the most difficult to write, at least until you get a little
       practice with reporting statistical analyses. This is the section where the results of the data
       analyses are presented. Section 2.07 in the APA manual (APA, 2010) will help a little bit. It’s
       often helpful to use tables (see Table 1) to help describe your results, especially when you have a
       lot of data to report, such as means and standard deviations. Table 2 provides another example of
       a table, this one describing correlations. 
          You may find it helpful to remind the reader of the hypothesis before presenting each
       result. It is also a good idea to tell the reader what type of data analysis was done (e.g.,
       correlation, ANOVA) before it is presented. State what alpha level you adopted; an alpha level of
       .05 is the standard. Although you should be sure not to try to interpret or explain your results
       here, it is appropriate to state whether or not your hypotheses were supported. Just don’t try to
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    7
       explain why the hypotheses were or were not supported; that’s why you have the Discussion
       section. 
                        Discussion
          The Discussion is the fourth and final section of the paper. This is the part where you
       interpret and explain your results. Try to explain why you found what you did in your study. Is it
       what you predicted? If not, why? You may have to think about your results in a theoretically
       meaningful way. Also, how do your findings fit in with previous theory and literature? Are your
       results consistent or inconsistent with what has been found in the past? If they are inconsistent,
       how can you explain this? The explanation and interpretation of results will probably be the
       biggest part of the Discussion. 
          There are at least two additional parts of the discussion. First, include limitations of the
       study. Describe the ways in which the internal or external validity of the study may have been
       compromised. Was the sample biased? Were the measures problematic? Think about what you
       would do different next time if you conducted a similar study. Future research ideas are often
       discussed when limitations are discussed. 
          Second, describe the implications of your findings to theory and practice. Answer the
       question, “How does my study add to psychological theory?” Also, think about practical
       applications of your findings. Perhaps give some additional directions for future research. When
       you’ve done that, you have written a paper in APA style!
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                    8
                        References
       American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological
          Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. 
       Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
          Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
       Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological
          Bulletin, 52, 281-302. doi:10.1037/h0040957
       Crowne, C. P., & Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of
          psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24, 349-354. doi:10.1037/h0047358
       Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
              SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                                                                    9
              Table 1
              Sample Table Describing Fake Data
                                            Variable A                 Variable B
                                          M          SD               M         SD
              Men (n = 100)              32.61       8.95           17.08       5.25
              Women (n = 80)             33.02       9.17           16.91       5.13
              Note. These data were totally made up. They are just presented to give you an idea about how to
              present information in a table. 
       SAMPLE FOR STUDENTS                   10
       Table 2
       Convergent and Discriminant Validity of Depression Scale
       Variable               Correlation
       Convergent Validity
       Self-Esteem             .44*
       Hopelessness            .51**
       Discriminant Validity
       Social Desirability     .11
       Anxiety                 .22
       *p < .05; **p < .01.
