                         FOREST INDUSTRY SAFETY ACCORD 
                          
                         INFORMATION LEAFLET 004-0415 
                         Lone Working 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                          
                                                                                                                                                                April 2015 
                         Lone working 
                          
                         1.  Introduction  
                                
                         This article provides guidance on how to keep lone workers healthy and safe.  It is for; 
                                    anyone who employs or engages lone workers 
                                    self-employed people who work alone 
                                    employees who work alone  
                          
                         Following the guidance is not compulsory, but it should help employers and lone workers 
                         understand how to manage lone working. This guidance is based on the HSE leaflet INDG73 (rev3) 
                         Working Alone. 
                          
                          
                         2.  Is it legal to work alone and is it safe?  
                          
                         Working alone is not against the law and it will often be safe to do so. However, the law requires 
                         employers to consider carefully, and then deal with, any health and safety risks for people working 
                         alone so that they comply with their legal duties under: 
                                    the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974;  
                                    The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999. 
                          
                          
                         3.  Who are lone workers? 
                          
                         Lone workers are those who work by themselves without close or direct supervision, for example:  
                                    harvester or Forwarder driver at the start or end of a site 
                                    machine operators working on different parts of site 
                                    chainsaw operators working on site but out of risk zone of others 
                                    timber purchaser visiting a sale 
                                    drivers (timber haulier/delivery) visiting remote locations 
                                    a person working alone in a workshop  
                          
                          
                         4.  How must risks of lone working be controlled? 
                          
                         Employer’s responsibilities: 
                          
                         Employers are responsible for the health, safety and welfare at work of all their workers. They also 
                         have responsibility for the health and safety of any contractors or self-employed people doing work 
                         Registered office: FISA, 59 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 2JG 
                         Registration number 450652 
                         www.ukfisa.com           
                          
                                                                                                                              
                  for them. These responsibilities cannot be transferred to any other person, including those people 
                  who work alone.  
                   
                  Employers have a duty to assess risks to lone workers and take steps to avoid or control risks where 
                  necessary.  
                   
                  This must include: 
                         involving workers when considering potential risks and measures to control them; 
                         taking steps to ensure risks are removed where possible, or putting in place control 
                          measures, eg carefully selecting work equipment to ensure the worker is able to perform the 
                          required tasks in safety;  
                         providing instruction, training and supervision;  
                         reviewing risk assessments periodically or when there has been a significant change in 
                          working practice. 
                   
                  This may include: 
                         being aware that some tasks may be too difficult or dangerous to be carried out by an 
                          unaccompanied worker; 
                         where a lone worker is working at another employer’s workplace, informing that other 
                          employer of the risks and the required control measures;  
                         when a risk assessment shows it is not possible for the work to be conducted safely by a lone 
                          worker, addressing that risk by making arrangements to provide help or back-up. 
                   
                  Employers who have five or more employees must record the significant findings of all risk 
                  assessments. 
                   
                  By law, employers must consult all their employees on health and safety matters. Effective 
                  consultation will also help ensure that relevant hazards are identified, and appropriate and 
                  proportionate control measures are chosen.  
                   
                  You can find more advice on HSE’s website:  
                  www.hse.gov.uk/toolbox/managing/consulting.htm. 
                   
                  Workers responsibilities: 
                   
                  All workers have responsibilities to take reasonable care of themselves and other people affected by 
                  their work activities and to co-operate with their employers in meeting their legal obligations. 
                                                     
                  FISA Information Leaflet 004-0415 – Lone Working                                                     Page 2 
                   
                                                                                                                              
                  5.  Examples of high-risk activities where at least one other person may need to be 
                      present 
                   
                  Risk assessment should help employers decide on the right level of supervision. 
                       pruning or felling trees whilst working in proximity to an overhead power line 
                       use of a chainsaws, power pruners or wood chippers 
                       Using motorized winches or mobile/overhead cranes to lift objects out of vision or objects 
                          requiring swing control without the supervision of a Banksman. 
                       application of pesticides  
                       work requiring the use of safety harnesses for fall protection 
                       using portable ladders, which cannot be readily lashed or secured and which therefore require 
                          to be secured by a person stationed at the base 
                       Climbing of trees for any purpose or use of rope access techniques. 
                   
                   
                  6.  Managing lone working 
                   
                  A.  Assess the hazards and risk  
                   
                  Lone workers should not be put at more risk than other employees. Establishing a healthy and safe 
                  working environment for lone workers can be different from organising the health and safety of 
                  other employees, but your risk assessment process should identify the issues relevant to your 
                  circumstances. 
                   
                  Employers should take account of normal work and foreseeable emergencies, eg fire, equipment 
                  failure, illness and accidents. Employers should identify situations where people work alone and 
                  consider the following: 
                   
                  The task 
                     Is there machinery involved in the work that one person cannot operate safely? 
                     Are chemicals or hazardous substances being used that may pose a particular risk to the lone 
                      worker? 
                     Does the work involve lifting objects too large for one person? 
                       
                  The environment 
                     Does the workplace present a specific risk to the lone worker, for example; Remote location with 
                      no mobile phone signal or particularly rough ground 
                     Is there a safe way in and out for one person, e.g. for a lone person working out of hours where 
                      the workplace could be locked up? 
                     Is there a risk of violence and/or aggression? 
                   
                  The individual 
                     Are there any reasons why the individual might be more vulnerable than others and be 
                      particularly at risk if they work alone (for example if they are young, pregnant, disabled or a 
                      trainee)? 
                  FISA Information Leaflet 004-0415 – Lone Working                                                     Page 3 
                   
                                                                                                                      
                   If the lone worker’s first language is not English, are suitable arrangements in place to ensure 
                    clear communications, especially in an emergency?  
                   If a person has a medical condition, are they able to work alone? Employers should seek medical 
                    advice if necessary. Consider both routine work and foreseeable emergencies that may impose 
                    additional physical and mental burdens on an individual. 
                 
                B.  Identify safe working and management procedures 
                 
                With hazards and risks understood, action should be taken to protect workers. Where possible lone 
                working should be avoided, however where it is not avoidable you should consider the following: 
                 
                Training  
                Training is particularly important where there is limited supervision to control, guide and help in 
                uncertain situations. Training may also be crucial in enabling people to cope in unexpected 
                circumstances and with potential exposure to violence and aggression. Lone workers are unable to 
                ask more experienced colleagues for help, so extra training may be appropriate. They need to be 
                sufficiently experienced and fully understand the risks and precautions involved in their work and 
                the location that they work in.  
                 
                Restricted and prohibited activities 
                Employers should set the limits to what can and cannot be done while working alone. They should 
                ensure workers are competent to deal with the requirements of the job and are able to recognise 
                when to seek advice from elsewhere. 
                 
                How will the person be supervised? 
                The extent of supervision required depends on the risks involved and the ability of the lone worker 
                to identify and handle health and safety issues. The level of supervision needed is a management 
                decision, which should be based on the findings of a risk assessment, ie the higher the risk, the 
                greater the level of supervision required. It should not be left to individuals to decide whether they 
                need assistance. 
                 
                Where a worker is new to a job, undergoing training, doing a job that presents specific risks, or 
                dealing with new situations, it may be advisable for them to be accompanied when they first take up 
                the post. 
                 
                Monitoring the work 
                Procedures must be put in place to monitor lone workers as effective means of communication are 
                essential. These may include:  
                   supervisors periodically visiting and observing people working alone; 
                   pre-agreed intervals of regular contact between the lone worker and supervisor, using phones, 
                    radios or email, bearing in mind the worker’s understanding of English language; 
                        o  E.g. there are phone-based services, which allow users to log in and out via phone call. 
                            Voice messages can be left if going into areas without mobile phone signal 
                   Implementing robust system to ensure a lone worker has returned to their base or home once 
                    their task is completed. 
                FISA Information Leaflet 004-0415 – Lone Working                                              Page 4 
                 
                                                                                                                              
                   
                  For more complex or higher risk work the following should be considered: 
                     satellite (GPS) based location and distress beacons 
                          o  E.g. devices are being used in the industry as they communicate via satellites and so do 
                               not rely on mobile phone coverage. Devices can be used with monitoring systems that 
                               can raise an alarm where pre-set to do so such as when a lone worker fails to identify 
                               themselves as safely returned. 
                     manually operated or automatic warning devices which trigger if specific signals are not received 
                      periodically from the lone worker, e.g. staff security systems;  
                          o  There are many such systems, but beware of the reliance on mobile phone signal to 
                               communicate information or a GPS position. 
                                    
                  C.  Plan robust responses to an emergency 
                   
                  Your assessment of the risks should identify foreseeable events. Emergency procedures should be 
                  established and employees trained in them. Information regarding emergency procedures should be 
                  given to lone workers. Your risk assessment may indicate that mobile workers should carry first-aid 
                  kits and/or that lone workers need first-aid training.  
                   
                  Ensure that those required to undertake emergency response know their responsibilities, and that 
                  they know how to act. Consider having an easy to understand escalation procedure to avoid 
                  unnecessary wasted time. 
                   
                  Consider registering with emergencySMS. To register, text ‘register’ to 999. You will get a reply – 
                  then follow the instructions you are sent.  
                   
                  7.  Find out more 
                   
                  Manual handling. Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992 (as amended). Guidance on 
                  Regulations L23 (Third edition) HSE Books 2004 ISBN 978 0 7176 2823 0 
                  www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l23.htm  
                   
                  Violence at work: A guide for employers Leaflet INDG69 (rev) HSE Books 1996 
                  www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg69.pdf  
                   
                  Working with substances hazardous to health: A brief guide to COSHH Leaflet INDG136 (rev5) HSE 
                  Books 2012 www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg136.htm  
                   
                  Working at height: www.hse.gov.uk/toolbox/height.htm 
                   
                  Other sources of advice: You can get additional information from FISA, your trade association or 
                  employers’ organisation, or from trade unions and some charities. 
                   
                  Further information 
                  For information about health and safety visit www.ukfisa.com or www.hse.gov.uk/. 
                  FISA Information Leaflet 004-0415 – Lone Working                                                     Page 5 
                   
