                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                       Responsibility of States forInternationally W                                                          rongful           Acts
                                                                                              2001 
                              
                                              Text adopted by the Commission at its fthird session, in 2001,ifty-                         and submitted to the 
                                         General Assembly as a part of the Commission’s report covering the work of that session. The 
                                         report, which also contains commentaries on the draft articles, apYearboopears ik ofn   the 
                                         International Law Commission, 2001vo,l . II (Part Two). Text reproduced as it appears in the 
                                         annex to General Assembly resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, and corrected by document 
                                         A/56/49(Vol. I)/Corr.4. 
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                
                                                                                   Copyright © United Nations
                                                                                              2005
                                               Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful  Acts
                                                                                       
                                                                                 PART  ONE 
                                                           THE INTERNATIONALLY WRONGFUL ACT OF A S TATE
                                                                                       
                                                                                CHAPTER I 
                                                                           GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
                                                                                       
                                                                                  Article l 
                                                     Responsibility of a State for its internationally wrongful acts 
                                 
                                Every internationally wrongful act of a State entails the international responsibility of that State. 
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 2 
                                                         Elements of an internationally wrongful act of a State 
                                 
                                There is an internationally wrongful act of a State when conduct consisting of an action or 
                         omission: 
                                 
                         (a)    is attributable to the State under international law; and 
                          
                         (b)    constitutes a breach of an international obligation of the State. 
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 3 
                                                   Characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful 
                                 
                                The characterization of an act of a State asrn inatiote nally wrongful is governed by international 
                         law. Such characterization is not affected by the characterization of the same act as lawful by internal 
                         law. 
                                                                                       
                                                                                CHAPTER II 
                                                                   TTRIBUTION OF CONDUCT TSO TAA TE 
                                                                  A
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 4 
                                                                      Conduct of organs of a State 
                                 
                                1. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under international law, 
                         whether the organ exercises ltive, executegisla            ive, judicial or any other functions, whatever position it 
                         holds in the organization of the State, and whatever its character as an organ of the central Government 
                         or of a territorial unit of the State. 
                                 
                                2. An organ includes any person or entity whicthat h hasstatus          in accordance with the internal law 
                         of the State. 
                                 Article 5 
                       Conduct of persons or entities exercising elements 
                           of governmental authority 
              
             The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under article 4 but which is 
          empowered by the law of that State to exercise elements of the governmental authority shall be 
          considered an act of the State under international law, provided the person or entity is acting in that 
          capacity in the particular instance. 
                                   
                                 Article 6 
                       Conduct of organs placed at the disposal of a State 
                             by another State 
             
             The conduct of an organ placed at the disposal of a State by another State shall be considered an 
          act of the former State under internationalor lgaaw ifn is the  acting in the exercise of elements of the 
          governmental authority of the State at whose disposal it is placed. 
                                   
                                 Article 7 
                       Excess of authority or contravention of instructions 
              
             The conduct of an organ of a State or of a person or entity empowered to exercise elements of the 
          governmental authority shall be consideredo af thn ace St tate under international law if the organ, 
          person or entity acts  thinat capacity, even if it exceeds its authority or contravenes instructions. 
                                   
                                   e 8 
                                 Articl
                         Conduct directed or controlled by a State 
              
             The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a State under 
          international law if the person or group of persons is in fact acting on the instructions of, or under the 
          direction or control of, that State in carrying out the conduct. 
                                   
                                 Article 9 
                         Conduct carried out in the absence or default 
                            of the official authorities 
              
             The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a State under 
          international law if the person or group of persons is in fact exercising elements of the governmental 
          authority in the absence or default of the official authorities and in circumstances such as to call for the 
          exercise of those elements of authority. 
                                   
                                Article 10 
                        Conduct of an insurrectional or other movement 
              
             1. The conduct of an insurrectional movement which becomes the new Government of a State 
          shall be considered an act of that State under international law. 
             2. The conduct of a movement, insurrectional or other, which succeeds in establishing a new State 
          in part of the territory of a pre-existing State or in a territory under its administration shall be considered 
          an act of the new State under international law. 
              
             3. This article is without prejudice to the attribution to a State of any conduct, however related to 
          that of the movement concerned, which is to be considered an act of that State by virtue of articles 4 
          to 9. 
                                   
                                Article 11 
                      Conduct acknowledged and adopted by a State as its own 
              
             Conduct which is not attributable to a State under the preceding articles shall nevertheless be 
          considered an act of that State under international law if and to the extent that the State acknowledges 
          and adopts the conduct in question as its own. 
                                   
                                CHAPTER III 
                         BREACH OF AN INTERNATIONAL OBLIGA TION
                                   
                                Article 12 
                       Existence of a breach of an international obligation 
              
             There is a breach of an international obligation by a State when an act of that State is not in 
          conformity with what is required ofobligat it by ion, rthatega rdless of its origin or character. 
                                   
                                Article 13 
                         International obligation in force for a State 
              
             An act of a State does not constitute a breach of an international obligation unless the State is 
          bound by the obligation in question at the time the act occurs. 
                                   
                                Article 14 
                     Extension in time of the brofeach  an international obligation 
              
             1. The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State not having a continuing character 
          occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even if its effects continue. 
              
             2. The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State having a continuing character 
          extends over the entire period during which the act continues and remains not in conformity with the 
          international obligation. 
              
             3. The breach of an international obligation requiring a State to prevent a given event occurs when 
          the event occurs and extends over the entire period during which the event continues and remains not in 
          conformity with that obligation. 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                           Article 15 
                                                                           Breach consisting of a composite act 
                                     
                                    1. The breach of an international obligation by a State through a series of actions or omissions 
                            defined in aggregate as wrongful occurs when the action or omission occurs which, taken with the other 
                            actions or omissions, is sufficient to constitute the wrongful act. 
                                     
                                    2. In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the first of the actions or 
                            omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these actions or omissions are repeated and remain not in 
                            conformity with tternathe inional obligation. 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                          CHAPTER IV 
                                                                 RESPONSIBILITY OF AS TATE IN CONNECTION WITH                           THE
                                                                                   ACT OF ANOTHER STATE 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                           Article 16 
                                                                        Aid or assistance in the commission of an 
                                                                            internationally wrongful act 
                                     
                                    A State which aids or assists another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by 
                            the latter is internationallresponsiy  ble for doing so if: 
                                     
                            (a)     that State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and 
                             
                            (b)     the act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that State. 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                           Article 17 
                                                                 Direction and control exercised over the commission 
                                                                        of an internationally wrongful act 
                                     
                                    A State which directs and controls another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful 
                            act by the latter is internatlly responsiiona             ble for that act if: 
                             
                            (a)     that State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and 
                             
                            (b)     the act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that State. 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                           Article 18 
                                                                                  Coercion of another State 
                                     
                                    A State which coerces another State to commit an act is internationally responsible for that act if: 
                             
                            (a)     the act would, but for the coercion, be an internationally wrongful act of the coerced State; and 
                             
                            (b)     the coercing State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the act. 
                                                                          Article 19 
                                                                    Effect of this chapter 
                              
                             This chapter is without prejudice to the international responsibility, under other provisions of 
                       these articles, of the State which commits the act in question, or of any other State. 
                                                                                
                                                                         CHAPTER V 
                                                        CIRCUMSTANCES PRECLUDING WRONGFULN  ESS
                                                                                
                                                                          Article 20 
                                                                           Consent 
                              
                             Valid consent by a State to the commission of a given act by another State precludes the 
                       wrongfulness of that act in relation to the former State to the extent that the act remains within the limits 
                       of that consent. 
                                                                                
                                                                          Article 21 
                                                                         Self-defence 
                              
                             The wrongfulness of an act of a State is priefc the actluded      constitutes a lawful measure of self-
                       defence taken in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. 
                                                                                
                                                                          Article 22 
                                                      Countermeasures in respect of an internationally 
                                                                     wrongful act 
                              
                             The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in cormity with an ionf         tionalnterna obligation towards 
                       another State is precluded if and to the extent that the act constitutes a countermeasure taken against the 
                       latter State in accordance with chapter II of part three. 
                                                                                
                                                                          Article 23 
                                                                        Force majeure 
                              
                             1. The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in conformity with an international obligation of that 
                       State is precluded if the act is due to force majeure, that is the occurrence of an irresistible force or of an 
                       unforeseen event, beyond the control of the State, making it materially impossible in the circumstances 
                       to perform the obligation. 
                              
                             2. Paragraph 1 does not apply if: 
                        
                       (a)   the situation of force majeure is duone ore, either a in col       mbination wi other fathctors, to the 
                       conduct of the State invoking it; or 
                        
                       (b)   the State has assumed the risk of that situation occurring. 
                                                                               Article 24 
                                                                                Distress 
                                
                               1. The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in conformity with an international obligation of that 
                        State is precluded if the author of the act in question has no other reasonable way, in a situation of 
                        distress, of saving the author’s life or the lives of other persons entrusted to the author’s care. 
                                
                               2. Paragraph 1 does not apply if: 
                         
                        (a)    the situation of distress is due, either alone or in combination with other factors, to the conduct of 
                        the State invoking it; or 
                         
                        (b)    the act in question is likely to create a comparable or greater peril. 
                                                                                      
                                                                               Article 25 
                                                                                Necessity 
                                
                               1. Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding the wrongfulness of an act 
                        not in conformity with an international obligation ofthat State  unless the act: 
                         
                        (a)    is the only way for the State to safeguarntiald an esse interest againstav a gre and imminent peril; 
                        and 
                         
                        (b)    does not seriously impair an essential interest of the State or wards States towhich the obligation 
                        exists, or of the international community as a whole. 
                                
                               2. In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding wrongfulness 
                        if: 
                         
                        (a)    the international obligation in question excludes the possibility of invoking necessity; or 
                         
                        (b)    the State has contributed to the situation of necessity. 
                                                                                      
                                                                               Article 26 
                                                                 Compliance with peremptory norms 
                                
                               Nothing in this chapterudes the precl wrongfulness of any act of a State which is not in 
                        conformity with an obligation arising underremptory norm of g a peeneral international law. 
                                                                                      
                                                                               Article 27 
                                                              Consequences of invoking a circumstance 
                                                                    precluding wrongfulness 
                                
                               The invocation of a circumstance precluding wrongfulness in accordance with this chapter is 
                        without prejudice to: 
                       (a)    compliance with the obligation inan questid to theon, ex itenf  t that the circumstance precluding 
                       wrongfulness no longer exists; 
                        
                       (b)    the question of compensation for any material loss caused by the act in question. 
                                                                                   
                                                                              ART TWO 
                                                                             P
                                                  CONTENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITYSTATE OF                A 
                                                                                   
                                                                            CHAPTER I 
                                                                       GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
                                                                                   
                                                                             Article 28 
                                                     Legal consequences of an internationally wrongful act 
                               
                              The international responsibility of a State which is entailed by an internationally wrongful act in 
                       accordance with the provisions of part one involves legal consequences as set out in this part. 
                                                                                   
                                                                             Article 29 
                                                                  Continued duty of performance 
                               
                              The legal consequences of an internationally wrongful act under this part do not affect the 
                       continued duty of the responsible State to perform the obligation breached. 
                                                                                   
                                                                             Article 30 
                                                                   Cessation and non-repetition 
                               
                              The State responsible for the internationally wrongful act is under an obligation: 
                        
                       (a)    to cease that act, if it is continuing; 
                        
                       (b)    to offer appropriate assurances and guarantees of non-repetition, if circumstances so require. 
                                                                                   
                                                                             Article 31 
                                                                            Reparation 
                               
                              1. The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by the 
                       internationally wrongful act. 
                               
                              2. Injury includes any damage, whether materia morl oral, caused by thein ternationally wrongful 
                       act of a State. 
                                                                                   
                                                                             Article 32 
                                                                    Irrelevance of internal law 
                               
                              The responsible State may not rely on the provisionof its s internal law as justification for failure 
                       to comply with its obligations under this part. 
                                                                              Article 33 
                                                       Scope of international obligations set out in this part 
                                
                               1. The obligations of the responsible State set out in this part may be owed to another State, to 
                        several States, or to the international community as a whole, depending in particular on the character and 
                        content of the international obligation and on the circumstances of the breach. 
                                
                               2. This part is without prejudice to any right, arising ftionalrom re the isponsibintelityrna of a 
                        State, which may accrue directly to any person or entity other than a State. 
                                                                                    
                                                                             CHAPTER II 
                                                                      REPARATION FOR INJUR          Y
                                                                                    
                                                                              Article 34 
                                                                        Forms of reparation 
                                
                               Full reparation for the injusedry cau by the internationally wrongful act shall take the form of 
                        restitution, compensation and satisfaction, either singly mborinat in coion, in accordance with the 
                        provisions of this chapter. 
                                                                                    
                                                                              Article 35 
                                                                             Restitution 
                                
                               A State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation to make restitution, 
                        that is, to re-establish the situation which existed before the wrongful act was committed, provided and 
                        to the extent that restitution: 
                         
                        (a)    is not materially impossible; 
                         
                        (b)    does not involve a burden out of all proportion to the benefit deriving from restitution instead of 
                        compensation. 
                                                                                    
                                                                              Article 36 
                                                                           Compensation 
                                
                               1. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation to compensate 
                        for the damage caused thereby, insofch damage isar as su          not made good by restitution. 
                                
                               2. The compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including loss of profits 
                        insofar as it is established. 
                                                                                    
                                                                              Article 37 
                                                                             Satisfaction 
                                
                                1. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation to give 
                         satisfaction for the injury caused by that act insofar as it cannot be made good by restitution or 
                         compensation. 
                                 
                                2. Satisfaction may consist in an acknowledgement of the breach, an expression of regret, a 
                         formal apology or another appropriate modality. 
                                 
                                3. Satisfaction shall not be out of proporthe ition tnjury and o         may notke a f ta orm humiliating to 
                         the responsible State. 
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 38 
                                                                                  Interest 
                                 
                                1. Interest on any principal sum due under this chapter shall be payable when necessary in order 
                         to ensure full reparation. The interest rate and mode of calculation shall be set so as to achieve that 
                         result. 
                                 
                                2. Interest runs from the date when the principal sum should have been paid until the date the 
                         obligation to pay is fulfilled. 
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 39 
                                                                        Contribution to the injury 
                                 
                                In the determination of reparation, account shall be taken of the contribution to the injury by 
                         wilful or negligent action or omission of theSta ite or annjured  y person or entity in relation to whom 
                         reparation is sought. 
                                                                                       
                                                                               CHAPTER III 
                                                       SERIOUS BREACHES OF OBLIGATIONS UNDER PEREMPT                                ORY
                                                                NORMS OF GENERAL INTERNATIONAL   LAW
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 40 
                                                                       Application of this chapter 
                                 
                                1. This chapter applies to the international responsibility which is entailed by a serious breach by 
                         a State of an obligation arising under a peremptory norm of general international law. 
                                 
                                2. A breach of such an obligation is serioit involves a gross orus if                                         systematic failure by the 
                         responsible State to lffuil the obligation. 
                                                                                       
                                                                                 Article 41 
                                                              Particular consequences of a serious breach 
                                                               of an obligation under this chapter 
                                 
                                1. States shall cooperate to bring to an end through lawful means any serious breach within the 
                         meaning of article 40. 
                                 
                                2. No State shall recognize as lawful a situcreaation ted by a serious breach within the meaning of 
                        article 40, nor render aid or assistance in maintaining that situation. 
                                 
                                3. This article is without prejudice to the other consequences referred to in this part and to such 
                        further consequences that a breach to which thisapt cher applies may entailunder   international law. 
                                                                                      
                                                                                ART THREE 
                                                                               P
                                                             THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONA  L
                                                                       RESPONSIBILITY OF A STA TE
                                                                                      
                                                                               CHAPTER I 
                                                            INVOCATION OF THE RESPONSIBILITY OF STAAT E 
                                                                                      
                                                                                Article 42 
                                                            Invocation of responsibility by an injured State 
                                 
                                A State is entitled as an injured State to ithe responsnvoke        ibility of another State if the obligation 
                        breached is owed to: 
                         
                        (a)     that State individually; or 
                         
                        (b)     a group of States including that State, or the international community as a whole, and the breach 
                        of the obligation: 
                                 
                                (i)    specially affects that State; or 
                                (ii)   is of such a character as radically to change the position of all the other States to which the 
                               obligation is owed with respectfurt to her performance ofthe                the obligation. 
                                                                                      
                                                                                Article 43 
                                                                  Notice of claim by an injured State 
                                 
                                1. An injured State which invokes the responsibility of another State shall give notice of its claim 
                        to that State. 
                                 
                                2. The injured State may specify in particular: 
                         
                        (a)     the conduct that the responsible State should take in order to cease the wrongful act, if it is 
                        continuing; 
                         
                        (b)     what form reparation should take in accordance with the provisions of part two. 
                                                                                      
                                                                                Article 44 
                                                                         Admissibility of claims 
                                 
                                The responsibility of a State may not be invoked if: 
                      (a)   the claim is not brought in accordance with any applicable rule relating to the nationality of 
                      claims; 
                       
                      (b)   the claim is one to which the rule ofon o exhaustif local remedies applies and any available and 
                      effective local remedy has not been exhausted. 
                                                                             
                                                                       Article 45 
                                                         Loss of the right to invoke responsibility 
                             
                            The responsibility of a State may not be invoked if: 
                       
                      (a)   the injured State has validly waived the claim; 
                       
                      (b)   the injured State is to be considered as having, by reason of its conduct, validly acquiesced in the 
                      lapse of the claim. 
                                                                             
                                                                       Article 46 
                                                                Plurality of injured States 
                             
                            Where several States are injureby thed  same internationally l act, each inwrongfujured State may 
                      separately invoke the responsibility of the State which has commrnationallitted the intey wrongful act. 
                                                                             
                                                                       Article 47 
                                                              Plurality of responsible States 
                             
                            1. Where several States are responsible for the same internationally wrongful act, the 
                      responsibility of each State may be invoked in relation to that act. 
                             
                            2. Paragraph 1: 
                       
                      (a)   does not permit any injured State to recover, by way of compensation, more than the damage it 
                      has suffered; 
                       
                      (b)   is without prejudice to any right of recourse against the other responsible States. 
                                                                             
                                                                       Article 48 
                                                       Invocation of responsibility by a State other 
                                                               than an injured State 
                             
                            1. Any State other than an injured State is entid to itlenvoke the responslityibi of another State in 
                      accordance with paragraph 2 if: 
                       
                      (a)   the obligation breached is owed to a group of States including that State, and is established for the 
                      protection of a collective interest of the group; or 
                       
                      (b)   the obligation breached ie inters owed nationalto th community as a whole. 
                                  
                                 2. Any State entitled to invoke responsibilitder paragry un aph 1 may claim from the responsible 
                         State: 
                          
                         (a)     cessation of the internationally wrongfulnd a actssura, ances and guarantees of non-repetition in 
                         accordance with article 30; and 
                          
                         (b)     performance of the obligation of reparation in accordance with the preceding articles, in the 
                         interest of the injured State or of the beneficiaries of the obligation breached. 
                                  
                                 3. The requirements for the invocation of responsibility by an injured State under articles 43, 44 
                         and 45 apply to an invocation of responsibility by a State entitled to do so under paragraph 1. 
                                                                                         
                                                                                 CHAPTER II 
                                                                             COUNTERMEASURES 
                                                                                         
                                                                                  Article 49 
                                                                   Object and limits of countermeasures 
                                  
                                 1. An injured State may only take countermeasures against a State which is responsible for an 
                         internationally wrongful act in order to induce that State to comply with its obligations under part two. 
                                  
                                 2. Countermeasures are limited to the non-performance for the time being of international 
                         obligations of the State taking the measures towards the responsible State. 
                                  
                                 3. Countermeasures shall, as far as possible, be taken in such a way as to permit the resumption of 
                         performance of the obligations in question. 
                                                                                         
                                                                                  Article 50 
                                                               Obligations not af byfected countermeasures 
                                  
                                 1. Countermeasures shall not affect: 
                          
                         (a)     the obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force as embodied in the Charter of the United 
                         Nations; 
                          
                         (b)     obligations for the protection of fundamental human rights; 
                          
                         (c)     obligations of a humanitarian character prohibiting reprisals; 
                          
                         (d)     other obligations under peremptory norms of general international law. 
                                  
                                 2. A State taking countermeasures ist reli no eved from fulfing its ill      obligations: 
                          
                         (a)     under any dispute settlement procedure applicable between it and the responsible State; 
                          
                         (b)    to respect the inviolability of diplomatinsularc or co agents, premises, archives and documents. 
                                                                                        
                                                                                 Article 51 
                                                                              Proportionality 
                                 
                                Countermeasures must be commensurate with the injury suffered, taking into account the gravity 
                         of the internationally wrongful act and the rights in question. 
                                                                                        
                                                                                 Article 52 
                                                            Conditions relating to resort to countermeasures 
                                 
                                1. Before taking countermeasures, an injured State shall: 
                          
                         (a)    call upon the responsible State, in accordance with article 43, to fulfil its obligations under part 
                         two; 
                          
                         (b)    notify the responsible State of any decision to take countermeasures and offer to negotiate with 
                         that State. 
                                 
                                                                      b), the injured State may take such urgent countermeasures as 
                                2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1 (
                         are necessary to preserve its rights. 
                                 
                                3. Countermeasures may not be taken, and if already taken must be suspended without undue 
                         delay if: 
                          
                         (a)    the internationally wrongful act has ceased; and 
                          
                         (b)    the dispute is pending before a court or tribunal which has the authority to make decisions binding 
                         on the parties. 
                                 
                                4. Paragraph 3 does not apply if the responsible State fails to implement the dispute settlement 
                         procedures in good faith. 
                                                                                        
                                                                                 Article 53 
                                                                     Termination of countermeasures 
                                 
                                Countermeasures shall be terminated as soon as the responsible State has complied with its 
                         obligations under part two in relation to the internationally wrongful act. 
                                                                                        
                                                                                 Article 54 
                                                          Measures taken by States other than an injured State 
                                 
                                This chapter does not prejudice the right of any State, entitled under article 48, paragraph 1, to 
                         invoke the responsibility of another State, to take lawful measures against that State to ensure cessation 
                         of the breach and reparation in the interest of the injured State or of the beneficiaries of the obligation 
                         breached. 
                                                                                       PART FOUR 
                                                                                 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
                                                                                              
                                                                                        Article 55 
                                                                                      Lex specialis 
                                    
                                   These articles do not apply where and to the extent that the conditions for the existence of an 
                           internationally wrongful act or the content or implementation of the international responsibility of a 
                           State are governed by specialrul  es of international law. 
                                                                                              
                                                                                        Article 56 
                                                                  Questions of State responsibility not regulated 
                                                                                by these articles 
                                    
                                   The applicable rules of international law continue to govern questions concerning the 
                           responsibility of a State forternationally  an in               wrongful act to the extent that they are not regulated by 
                           these articles. 
                                 
                                                                                        Article 57 
                                                                 Responsibility of an international organization 
                                    
                                   These articles are without prejudice to any question of the responsibility under international law 
                           of an international organization, or of any Stforate  the conduct of an international organization. 
                                                                                              
                                                                                        Article 58 
                                                                               Individual responsibility 
                                    
                                   These articles are without prejudice totion of th any quese individual responsibility under 
                           international law of any person acting on behalf of a State. 
                                                                                              
                                                                                        Article 59 
                                                                            Charter of the United Nations 
                                    
                                   These articles are without prejudice to the Charter of the United Nations. 
                                    
                                                                                _____________ 
                                                                                              
