              
                                                        Action Plan  
                        for the implementation of Articles 11(1) and 11(2)  
                                      of the Treaty on European Union 
                      Towards better EU civil dialogue and involvement of citizens for better policy-making 
                                                   building on the Riga Roadmap 
                                                                     
                  
                                          Article 11(1) and 11(2) of the Treaty on EU 
                "1. The institutions shall, by appropriate means, give citizens and representative associations the 
                   opportunity to make known and publicly exchange their views in all areas of Union action. 
                 2. The institutions shall maintain an open, transparent and regular dialogue with representative 
                                                associations and civil society." 
                  
                  
             1. INTRODUCTION 
                  
             1.1​.​ Purpose 
             This action plan is intended as a follow-up to the relevant Roadmap adopted by the NGO Forum in Riga 
                                                                                                                1
             in 2015, outlining the concrete actions needed for the implementation of better civil dialogue  in the 
             EU and the involvement of citizens and their associations. It reflects citizens’ calls for better decisions, 
             better policy making and better governance responding to citizens’ needs. 
              
             The action plan sets out a vision of what the dialogue should seek to achieve and how it could be 
             implemented in an effective, constructive and realistic manner with the widest range of supporters 
             and  stakeholders.  It  lays  the  groundwork  for  civil  dialogue  in  which  representative  civil  society 
             organisations play a key role while, at the same time, the full potential of citizens, directly involved or 
             not with CSOs, is harnessed. In this respect, "a distinction should be drawn between consultations of 
             civil  society  organisations  and  of  the  general  public.  The difference between the two is not only a 
             matter  of  methodology,  but  also  of  objective,  since  for  the  former  group  the  aim  is  to  ensure 
                                                                                                          2
             representativeness, while for the latter, it is about promoting inclusion and participation" . 
              
             1.2. Current context  
             Article 11 of the Treaty on European Union provides the legal basis for this. EU institutions, Member 
                                     3
             States and civil society  — including but not limited to individuals and representative associations — 
             must work together to put Article 11 into practice. Civil society organisations (CSOs) play a crucial role 
             in promoting active citizenship in Europe. Participatory democracy needs intermediary bodies if it is 
             to involve the citizens and encourage them to express their views in all civic spaces. Civil dialogue has 
             1
               ​The European Economic and Social Committee defines civil dialogue as a democratic and public 
             opinion-forming process which can take various forms, depending on the players involved. 
             2
               ​EESC Opinion on​ Evaluation of consultation of stakeholders by the European Commission​, ​OJC 383, 17.11.2015, p. 
             58​. 
             3
               In accordance with the ​Council of Europe Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation 14 (2007)​ civil society 
             organisations are defined as “voluntary self-governing bodies or organisations established to pursue the 
             essentially non-profit-making objectives of their founders or members.  They do not include political parties.” 
                                                                                                                      1 
              
            the potential to extend and strengthen the European model of democracy and is a key tool in securing 
            ownership, completion and modernisation of the model. 
             
            A political and legal framework should be put in place at European and Member States (MS) level to 
            nurture the development of civil society in Europe, whose activities are an integral part of EU values 
            anchored in fundamental rights. However, the reality is very different as the civic space in some EU 
            Member  States  is  increasingly  shrinking,  becoming  thereby  the  most  dangerous  factor  for  the 
            functioning  of  CSOs  and  for  European  democracy.  A  robust,  independent,  diversified  and 
            well-functioning organised civil society needs adequate public and private financing which also has a 
            bearing on granting the various stakeholders in European civil society dialogue a role and status of 
            their own, adding up to the needed recognition to counteract the shrinking civic space noted in some 
                          4
            Member States . Therefore, special attention has to be payed to an adequate financial strength of CSOs 
            serving the public good as they are central to fostering the conjunction between social capital and 
            economic development, account for resilience of the communities and thus for the internal security of 
            Member States and the European Union as a whole. 
             
             
            2. KEY FEATURES OF CIVIL DIALOGUE 
            Multi-level 
            Civil dialogue reaches out to, involves and includes individuals and organised civil society at all levels 
            — local, regional, Member States and European. 
             
            Open, transparent and inclusive 
            Civil dialogue supplements direct participation methods; citizens, organised in civil society structures 
            representing their interests, will be able to participate in and contribute to civil dialogue at the level 
            that best suits them. Digital tools such as e-platforms and other new-tech approaches should be used 
            for collaboration along with traditional ones. 
             
            Building on existing dialogues, consultations and participation 
            Civil dialogue gives an overarching structure to existing dialogues, as well as those yet to be developed, 
            between EU institutions and organised civil society focusing on particular themes. While consultation 
            as a vital component of civil dialogue is a top-down process open in theory to all CSOs and citizens, 
            participation is a bottom-up-process as opportunity ​for CSO to intervene formally and actively in the 
            collective decision-making process. 
             
            Towards better policy-making  
            Civil  dialogue  is  a  process  for  exchanging  expertise  and  connecting  with  innovation  in  grassroots 
            citizens’ organisations. It is a space for identifying and reflecting and building on the values, principles 
            and objectives of the European project, creating a European public sphere by closing the gap between 
            policymakers and citizens and also harnessing the potential for direct participation by citizens. It will 
            lead  to  better  policy  development  for  the  common  good  which  is  closer  to  citizens'  needs  and 
            expectations, generating a greater sense of common ownership. The role of civil dialogue is crucial in 
            the drafting of legislation, as it allows the impact of the legislation on the citizens to be assessed. 
             
            Joint actions on agreed EU priorities 
            Civil dialogue is a place for civil society and the EU institutions to cooperate and build joint projects for 
            better  implementation of EU policies, contributing to better understanding amongst citizens of the 
            4
              ​EESC Opinion on ​Financing of Civil Society Organisations by the EU​, OJ C 2017?, ​to be completed​,   
                                                                                                            2 
             
             added value of the European Union and evaluating the impact that policies have on civil society and 
             citizens. The value of cross-sector and cross-thematic initiatives should be borne in mind. 
              
             European integration through civil society 
             Civil dialogue is an opportunity to create links between the citizens themselves, organised civil society 
             and their policymakers from across the EU. It can lead to EU-wide cooperation, exchange and projects 
             for change that encourage the development of stronger ownership and a stronger sense of European 
             identity and for these reasons should be fully taken into account in the current and subsequent MFFs. 
              
              
             3. PROPOSED ACTIONS 
                  
             The action plan outlines ​three levels​ of dialogue reflecting Article 11 (1) and (2):  
             3.1​.  ​Horizontal d​ialogue between citizens and representative associations as opportunities to 
             make known and publicly exchange views in all areas of Union action (Local, Regional, Member 
             States and EU Dialogues) ​(Article 11(1)) 
              
             Structure 
             All citizens, engaged in and with organised civil society to represent their interests and values, or as 
             individuals, will be able to express their view, exchange opinions and access civil dialogue at the level 
             that suits them best – be that local, regional, Member States or EU level. These dialogues should be 
             self-organised  by  the  citizens  and  their  representative  associations/civil  society  organisations,  in 
             existing or innovative formats, with the support of the relevant public authority, thus getting as close 
             to  the  citizens  as  possible  and  helping  to  reduce  feelings  of  isolation  and  distance  from  policy 
             development and policy-making that has such a huge impact in their lives and that of their fellow 
             citizens.  
               
             The format, agenda and topics for discussion would be decided by the citizens and their representative 
             associations/civil society organisations , embracing new forms of engagement and participation. The 
             outcomes would feed into the Member States and EU-level dialogue process. 
               
             Proposed  actions  ​building  on  ​NGO  networks,  councils,  initiatives  by  organised  civil  society  and 
             grassroots movements, national Conventions such as the proposal from the French President in 2017: 
              
              
                                   Actions                                             Partners 
             1. Relevant public authorities should establish an   Public authorities from different levels, Member 
             encouraging environment to facilitate civil          State  European  Affairs  Departments,  Economic 
             dialogue​ at EU, Member States and sub-Member        and Social Councils (where existing), civil society 
             States levels.                                       platforms, grassroots movements. 
                                                                   
                                                                                             
             2. The potential of ​digital participation ​should   Public authorities from different levels, Member 
             be tapped. e.g. by launching an ​EU participation    State  European  Affairs  Departments,  Economic 
             2.0 Strategy​ to enable the exchange of promising  and Social Councils (where existing), civil society 
             examples between all levels (local, regional,        platforms, grassroots movements. 
             Member States and European), set up the               
             objectives and envisage the steps for the creation 
             of a ​digital system for citizens’ engagement​. 
                                                                                                                     3 
              
                                                                                                                      
                3. Based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights                       Public authorities from different levels,  Economic 
                and by recognising the Freedom of Association,                      and Social Councils (where existing), civil society 
                promote participation in decision-making​ by                        platforms,  
                regularly monitoring the existing situation, 
                reporting on it and spreading best practice. 
                 
                3.2  ​Vertical  dialogue  between ​national institutions and representative associations and civil 
                society ​ (Article 11(2)) 
                 
                Structure 
                Although Member States traditions and legal frameworks differ considerably, EU decisions are, to a 
                large extent, prepared by Member States-level departments and have the greatest impact at Member 
                States, regional and local levels. Treaties are binding upon Member States and joint commitments and 
                aims  (such  as  the  Europe  2020  Strategy)  cannot  be  achieved  without  broad  ownership  and 
                participation by the citizens. The thematic dialogues that often already exist at Member States level 
                need better EU recognition and support measures so that they can be extended to other Member 
                States. Member States dialogues should form part of the debate in the annual EU dialogue.  
                 
                Proposed actions ​building on existing dialogues on EU issues at Member States level e.g. health, 
                youth, sport, trade etc. EYC 2013 Citizens' Dialogues (adapted and restructured)​: 
                 
                                            Actions                                                            Partners 
                4. Continue to gather ​information about ​existing  CSO  representatives  involved  in  the  dialogues 
                successful  dialogues  at  Member  States  level  (also via Economic and Social Councils or other 
                building on the work undertaken by Civil Society  Member States-level structures (where existing) 
                Europe (CSE). 
                5. Consultation with stakeholders from sectors  CSO  representatives,  European  Commission, 
                and fields with need for improvement regarding  national governments 
                regular dialogue 
                6.  A  ​recommendation  from  the  Council  to   
                establish Member States dialogues across the  European Council 
                Member States,                                                       
                                                                                     
                7.  Establish  ​mechanisms  for  exchanging  and  CSOs, European Commission 
                disseminating ​good practices 
                8.    Introduce  ​quality  assurance  standards,  CSOs, Member States, European Commission 
                criteria and guidelines for participation 
                 
                9.    Promote  ​civic  education  on  common  Member States 
                European values and mechanisms. 
                10. Establish ​open consultation processes (both  EU Presidencies 
                offline and online) on EU topics 
                11​.     Annual        report       on      civil     dialogue   Future European Observatory of Civil Society 
                developments in Member States 
                 
                                                                                                                                                      4 
                 
              12.   ​Appropriate  means  to  finance  civil  Member States 
              dialogue and to strengthen the capacity of CSOs 
              to take part 
              13. Revision of its ​instruments/programmes to  European Commission 
              support  CSOs  operating  in  the  field  of 
              participation,  democracy  and  rule  of  law  at 
              Member States level 
              14.  Include  ​citizen  participation/democracy  European Commission 
              among  the  horizontal  priorities  of  its 
              programm​es 
              15. Strengthen EU Citizens' Dialogues across EU  Member  States,  European  Commission,  CSOs, 
              Member States                                             European Parliament 
               
               
              3.3 ​Vertical dialogue between ​EU institutions​ and representative associations and civil society 
              (Article 11(2)) 
               
              Structure  
              Appropriate regular and structured dialogue forums to link every EU institution with civil society 
              while creating synergies between the institutions where possible. Existing best practice should be 
              extended and strengthened to ensure effective impact on policy-making. Among other tools, this would 
              include  a  yearly  event  bringing  together  EU  institutions  represented  at  the  highest  levels  and 
              organised civil society as well as representatives from sectoral dialogues and local, regional, national 
              and macro-regional (transnational and neighbourhood policy) dialogues.  
               
              Such yearly event seem to be the EESC's Civil Society Days (CivSocDays) with workshops and thematic 
              meetings feeding into a comprehensive closing session and a final joint declaration or annual work 
              plan to be forwarded to all the EU institutions, which would all be required to issue a formal reaction. 
              The CivSocDays should be developed along the lines of the Committee of the Regions' Open Days with 
              parallel events in Brussels and in the Member States. 
               
              Proposed actions ​building on the European Economic and Social Committee  Liaison Group with 
              CSOs, EESC Civil Society Days and the informal EPSCO meetings which since 2000 have integrated a 
              wider involvement of civil society through consultation – at the same level as the social partners – 
              ahead of decision-making at the formal EPSCO meetings: 
               
               
                                     Actions                                                  Partners 
              16. Identify, extend and strengthen existing ​best       European  Economic  and  Social  Committee, 
              practice ​and make the changes in EU                     European Commission, European Parliament and 
              decision-making resulting from civic engagement  European Council,  Committee of the Regions 
              visible. Policy areas with improvement potential                                       
              should be identified and a mechanism supporting 
              and coordinating these actions and existing 
              dialogues should be set up. 
              17. In-depth ​evaluations​ of relevant                   European Commission, European Parliament 
              Commission-funded pilot projects (like Europe 
              for Citizens) .  
              18. Develop improved ​strategies​ that clearly           CSOs 
              harness so-called “participatory processes”   such 
                                                                                                                               5 
               
             as crowdsourcing for policy ideas, etc.to regular 
             decision-making processes involved elected 
             representatives. 
             19. Establish a​ Statute for European                 European Commission, European Parliament and 
             Associations​ ​together with a statute or policy  European Council 
             framework for European institutional 
             philanthropy. This would promote 
             recognition of CSOs and cooperation between 
             them at European level, complementing the 
             European Company Statute adopted in 2004. 
             20. Establish a ​European Observatory of Civil        European Economic and Social Committee and its 
             Society ​to measure and monitor civil dialogue        Liaison Group 
             and levels of citizen engagement with the EU 
             institutions and the decision-making and 
             policy-making processes. Building on the work of 
             Civil Society Europe, it should adopt a yearly 
             report on the state of civil dialogue and of civil 
             society in general in all Member States.  
             21. Entrust without delay a ​specific                 European Commission 
             Commissioner responsible for coordinating 
             civil dialogue​ and allocate the relevant human 
             resources to be able to implement it. Each DG 
             should have an official who is responsible for 
             dialogue and appropriate finances for supporting 
             participation in decision-making.  
             22. Establish a constructive ​dialogue and            European Commission, European Economic and 
             follow-up between the different                       Social Committee 
             directorates-general and CSOs​ for the purpose 
             of assessing good and bad practice and 
             developing a more consistent approach. 
             23. Establish a specific ​unit and a political        European Parliament 
             position in the European Parliament​, such as a 
             Vice-President, as required by the EU treaties, as 
             well as specific official responsible for civil 
             dialogue with the European  Parliament. 
             24. Agree ​appropriate and sustainable funding  European Commission, Council and Parliament  
             opportunities from EU sources in the next MFFs  
             25. Encourage Member States to introduce​ tax         European Commission, Council and Parliament 
             incentives for private donations and 
             institutional philanthropy​ and remove 
             obstacles to cross-border donations and 
             philanthropic funding by coordinating tax laws 
             and procedures, and invest in philanthropy 
             across the EU. 
             26. Recognise and establish ​partnerships             EU institutions 
                                                        5
             with organised  civil society bodies , 
             thereby creating the conditions for a 
             5
               some Member States have adopted "charters of reciprocal commitment" or "pacts" to this end 
                                                                                                                       6 
              
             structured European civil dialogue and 
             implementing Article 11 of the TEU and other 
                                                            6
             relevant intergovernmental commitments . 
                    
                                                     ___________________________ 
             6
               EESC Opinion SOC/563  
                                                                                                                     7 
              
