                                DOESTHEINERTIAOFABODYDEPEND
                                         UPONITSENERGY-CONTENT?
                                                          ByA.EINSTEIN
                                                          September 27, 1905
                                  Theresults of the previous investigation lead to a very interesting conclusion,
                              which is here to be deduced.
                                  I based that investigation on the Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space,
                              together with the Maxwellian expression for the electromagnetic energy of space,
                              and in addition the principle that:—
                                  The laws by which the states of physical systems alter are independent of
                              the alternative, to which of two systems of coordinates, in uniform motion of
                              parallel translation relatively to each other, these alterations of state are referred
                              (principle of relativity).
                                  With these principles∗ as my basis I deduced inter alia the following result
                              (§ 8):—
                                  Let a system of plane waves of light, referred to the system of co-ordinates
                              (x,y,z), possess the energy l; let the direction of the ray (the wave-normal)
                              make an angle φ with the axis of x of the system. If we introduce a new system
                              of co-ordinates (ξ,η,ζ) moving in uniform parallel translation with respect to
                              the system (x,y,z), and having its origin of co-ordinates in motion along the
                              axis of x with the velocity v, then this quantity of light—measured in the system
                              (ξ,η,ζ)—possesses the energy
                                                                   1−vcosφ
                                                            l∗ = lp    c
                                                                         2  2
                                                                    1−v /c
                              where c denotes the velocity of light. We shall make use of this result in what
                              follows.
                                  Let there be a stationary body in the system (x,y,z), and let its energy—
                              referred to the system (x,y,z) be E . Let the energy of the body relative to the
                                                                 0
                              system (ξ,η,ζ) moving as above with the velocity v, be H0.
                                  Let this body send out, in a direction making an angle φ with the axis
                              of x, plane waves of light, of energy 1L measured relatively to (x,y,z), and
                                                                    2
                              simultaneously an equal quantity of light in the opposite direction. Meanwhile
                              the body remains at rest with respect to the system (x,y,z). The principle of
                                 ∗The principle of the constancy of the velocity of light is of course contained in Maxwell’s
                              equations.
                                                                    1
                       energy must apply to this process, and in fact (by the principle of relativity)
                       with respect to both systems of co-ordinates. If we call the energy of the body
                       after the emission of light E1 or H1 respectively, measured relatively to the
                       system (x,y,z) or (ξ,η,ζ) respectively, then by employing the relation given
                       above we obtain
                                   E   = E +1L+1L,
                                    0      1  2   2
                                              1  1−vcosφ    1  1+vcosφ
                                   H = H + Lp c           + Lp c
                                    0      1  2       2 2   2      2  2
                                                  1−v /c        1−v /c
                                       = H +p L        .
                                           1        2 2
                                                1−v /c
                       By subtraction we obtain from these equations
                                                       (p 1         )
                                    H −E −(H −E )=L               −1 .
                                     0   0    1   1           2 2
                                                          1−v /c
                       The two diﬀerences of the form H−E occurring in this expression have simple
                       physical signiﬁcations. H and E are energy values of the same body referred
                       to two systems of co-ordinates which are in motion relatively to each other,
                       the body being at rest in one of the two systems (system (x,y,z)). Thus it is
                       clear that the diﬀerence H−E can diﬀer from the kinetic energy K of the body,
                       with respect to the other system (ξ,η,ζ), only by an additive constant C, which
                       depends on the choice of the arbitrary additive constants of the energies H and
                       E. Thus we may place
                                            H −E = K +C,
                                              0   0      0
                                            H −E = K +C,
                                              1   1      1
                       since C does not change during the emission of light. So we have
                                                  (p 1         )
                                        K −K =L              −1 .
                                          0   1          2  2
                                                     1−v /c
                          Thekinetic energy of the body with respect to (ξ,η,ζ) diminishes as a result
                       of the emission of light, and the amount of diminution is independent of the
                       properties of the body. Moreover, the diﬀerence K −K , like the kinetic energy
                                                             0  1
                       of the electron (§ 10), depends on the velocity.
                          Neglecting magnitudes of fourth and higher orders we may place
                                              K −K = 1 Lv2.
                                               0   1     2
                                                       2c
                       From this equation it directly follows that:—
                                                    2
                                  If a body gives oﬀ the energy L in the form of radiation, its mass diminishes
                                     2
                              by L/c . The fact that the energy withdrawn from the body becomes energy of
                              radiation evidently makes no diﬀerence, so that we are led to the more general
                              conclusion that
                                  The mass of a body is a measure of its energy-content; if the energy changes
                                                                                       20
                              by L, the mass changes in the same sense by L/9 × 10 , the energy being
                              measured in ergs, and the mass in grammes.
                                  It is not impossible that with bodies whose energy-content is variable to a
                              high degree (e.g. with radium salts) the theory may be successfully put to the
                              test.
                                  If the theory corresponds to the facts, radiation conveys inertia between the
                              emitting and absorbing bodies.
                                                           About this Document
                                       This edition of Einstein’s Does the Inertia of a Body Depend upon its
                                    Energy-ContentisbasedontheEnglishtranslationofhisoriginal1905German-
                                    language paper (published as Ist die Tr¨agheit eines K¨orpers von seinem En-
                                    ergiegehalt abh¨angig?, in Annalen der Physik. 18:639, 1905) which appeared
                                    in the book The Principle of Relativity, published in 1923 by Methuen and
                                    Company, Ltd. of London. Most of the papers in that collection are English
                                    translations by W. Perrett and G.B. Jeﬀery from the German Das Relativat-
                                    sprinzip, 4th ed., published by in 1922 by Tuebner. All of these sources are
                                    now in the public domain; this document, derived from them, remains in the
                                    public domain and may be reproduced in any manner or medium without
                                    permission, restriction, attribution, or compensation.
                                       The footnote is as it appeared in the 1923 edition. The 1923 English
                                    translation modiﬁed the notation used in Einstein’s 1905 paper to conform
                                    to that in use by the 1920’s; for example, c denotes the speed of light, as
                                    opposed the V used by Einstein in 1905. In this paper Einstein uses L to
                                    denote energy; the italicised sentence in the conclusion may be written as
                                                         2
                                    the equation “m = L/c ” which, using the more modern E instead of L to
                                                                                  2
                                    denote energy, may be trivially rewritten as “E = mc ”.
                                       This edition was prepared by John Walker. The current version of this
                                    document is available in a variety of formats from the editor’s Web site:
                                                        http://www.fourmilab.ch/
                                                                    3
