                                                                                    CHEST
                                    CHEST
                                    HEART                                           HEART
                                    AORTA                                           AORTA 
                                    WITH AN                                         WITH AN 
                                    ANEURYSM                                        ANEURYSM
                                    ABDOMEN                                         ABDOMEN
             Abdominal aortic aneurysm  
             (AAA) screening
             A free NHS check for men aged 65 and over
       ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
       Who is this lealfet for?
       This lealfet provides information on abdominal aortic aneurysm 
       screening (also called AAA screening) for men aged 65 and over. 
       It explains what an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is and what 
       happens when you go for screening. It should help you decide if you 
       want to be screened.
       The AAA screening check is a simple free ultrasound scan. 
       Who can be screened?
       The NHS invites all men for screening in the year they turn 65.
       What about men aged over 65?
       Men aged over 65 who have not been screened before can contact 
       their local service to arrange a test.
       What is an abdominal aortic aneurysm?
       The aorta is the main blood vessel that supplies blood to your body. It 
       runs from your heart down through your chest and abdomen.
       In some people, as they get older, the wall of the aorta in the 
       abdomen can become weak. It can then start to expand and form an 
       abdominal aortic aneurysm.
       The condition is most common in men aged 65 and over.
        2
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
     CHEST                                                    CHEST
     HEART                                                    HEART
     NORMAL                                                   NORMAL
     ABDOMINAL                                                ABDOMINAL
     AORTA                                                    AORTA
     ABDOMEN                                                  ABDOMEN
CHEST                                                       CHEST
HEART                                                       HEART
AORTA                                                       AORTA 
WITH AN                                                     WITH AN 
ANEURYSM                                                    ANEURYSM
ABDOMEN                                                     ABDOMEN
       3
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
      Is an abdominal aortic aneurysm serious?
      Large aneurysms are rare but can be very serious. As the wall of the 
      aorta stretches it becomes weaker and can burst, causing internal 
      bleeding. Around 85 out of 100 people die when an aneurysm bursts.
      An aorta which is only slightly larger than normal is not dangerous. 
      However, it is still important to know about it so that we can check if 
      the aneurysm is getting bigger.
      Why is screening important?
      If you have an aneurysm you will not usually notice any symptoms. 
      This means you cannot tell if you have one, will not feel any pain and 
      will probably not notice anything different.
      We offer screening so we can ifnd aneurysms early and monitor or 
      treat them. This greatly reduces the chances of the aneurysm causing 
      serious problems.
      The easiest way to ifnd out if you have an aneurysm is to have an 
      ultrasound scan of your abdomen.
       4
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
      How common is the condition?
      Around 1 in 70 men who are screened have an abdominal aortic 
      aneurysm.
      Who is most at risk?
         Men are six times more likely to have an abdominal aortic 
        aneurysm than women, which is why women are not offered 
        screening. The chance of having an aneurysm increases with age.
        Your chance of having an abdominal aortic aneurysm can also 
        increase if: 
        •	 you are or have ever been a smoker 
        •	 you have high blood pressure 
        •	 your brother, sister or parent has, or has had, an 
            abdominal aortic aneurysm
       5
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
      What will happen when I go for screening?
      We use a simple ultrasound scan, similar to that offered to pregnant 
      women. This is very quick and usually lasts less than 10 minutes. 
      At the clinic we will check your personal details, explain the scan and 
      give you the chance to ask any questions.  
      We will ask you to lie down and lift up or unbutton your shirt. You will 
      not need to undress. We will put a cool gel on your abdomen.
      We will then slide the scanning sensor over your skin. The scan will 
      show a picture of the aorta on a screen and we will measure it.
      We will tell you your result straight away and also send a copy to your 
      GP practice.
       6
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
      Your personal information
         You must be able to give your consent:
         1.  to be screened
         2.  for your personal information to be used by the 
            screening programme to provide a safe service 
         By law, everyone working in, or on behalf of, the NHS must 
         respect your privacy and keep all information about you safe. 
         The NHS Constitution sets out how the NHS should handle your 
         records to protect your privacy. In addition there are laws in place 
         to ensure conifdentiality is maintained.
       7
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
      There are four possible results:
         Normal
         If your aorta is less than 3cm wide, this means the aorta is not 
         enlarged (there is no aneurysm). Most men have a normal 
         result. No treatment or monitoring is needed afterwards. We will 
         not invite you for AAA screening again. 
         Small aneurysm
         If your aorta is between 3cm and 4.4cm wide, you have a small 
         aneurysm. We invite men with a small aneurysm back for scans 
         every 12 months to check if it is getting bigger.
         Medium aneurysm
         If your aorta is between 4.5cm and 5.4cm wide, you have a 
         medium aneurysm. We invite men with a medium aneurysm back 
         for scans every 3 months to check if it is getting bigger. 
         Large aneurysm
         If your aorta is 5.5cm wide or bigger, you have a large 
         aneurysm. Only about 1 in 1,000 men who are screened 
         have a large aneurysm. We give men with a large aneurysm an 
         appointment with a specialist team to have more scans and talk 
         about possible treatment, usually an operation. 
       8
       ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
       What happens if I have a small or medium 
       aneurysm?
       You will not need treatment at this stage. However, it is important to 
       monitor the size of the aneurysm as you might need treatment if it 
       gets bigger. Most aneurysms get bigger very slowly, so many men with 
       a small or medium aneurysm will never need treatment.
       We will invite you to come back for scans every year if you have 
       a small aneurysm or every three months if you have a medium 
       aneurysm.
       We will give you advice on reducing the chance of the aneurysm 
       getting larger. Your GP practice may also want to give you tablets or 
       review your current medication. They may also want to check your 
       blood pressure.
       What happens if I have a large aneurysm?
       If we ifnd a large aneurysm, we will refer you to a specialist team. They 
       will carry out some more tests and a specialist will discuss possible 
       treatment with you. This is typically an operation, usually arranged 
       within a few weeks if you decide you want it. 
       During the time when a large AAA is untreated, you may need to stop 
       driving and to check health-related insurance, such as travel insurance. 
       Treatment for aneurysms that are found using screening is usually very 
       effective. There are risks from treatment which will be explained in 
       detail by the specialist.
       Not everyone who has a large aneurysm will have an operation.
        9
       ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
       What are the risks?
       There is no risk from the scan itself.
       However, around 54 out of every 10,000 men screened will eventually 
       have surgery to repair an aneurysm. On average, one of these 54 men 
       will not survive the operation but their aneurysm may never have burst 
       if left untreated.
       Screening does not completely remove the risk of an aneurysm 
       bursting but it is the best method of protection against this condition.
       Will AAA screening pick up other 
       problems?
       No. Screening is just to see if you have an abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
       It does not look for other problems. If you are worried about any 
       medical problem you should speak to your GP practice.
       How reliable is the scan?
       The scan used to ifnd aneurysms is very reliable. No screening test can 
       be completely effective but it is very rare for a man who has had a 
       normal result to develop a large aneurysm.
       Sometimes the person carrying out the scan will not be able to see the 
       aorta clearly. This is nothing to worry about and they will ask you to 
       have another scan, usually on a different day.
       10
      ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEUR SCREENING PROGRAMMEYSM
      Where can I ifnd more information?
        •	 Men	who	want	more	information	before	deciding	if	they	
           want	to	be	screened	can	visit	the	AAA	Screening	Patient	
           Decision	Aid	at	www.nhs.uk/aaadecisionaid		
        •	 If	you	have	been	invited	for	screening,	the	phone	
           number	for	your	local	screening	service	is	on	your	
           appointment	letter	
        •	 You	can	ifnd	information	about	the	NHS	AAA	Screening	
           Programme	and	contact	details	for	your	local	service	at	
           www.nhs.uk/aaa		
        •	 The	Circulation	Foundation	supports	people	with	
           diseases	of	the	veins	and	arteries,	known	as	vascular	
           diseases,	including	abdominal	aortic	aneurysms.		
           www.circulationfoundation.org.uk	
        •	 The	British	Heart	Foundation:	www.bhf.org.uk		
        •	 You	can	also	speak	to	your	GP	practice
      11
             First published     January 2015
             Review due          January 2018
             Reference           AAA01
                                 © Crown copyright 2015
             Web address         www.nhs.uk/aaa
                                © Crown copyright 2015
                                You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, 
                                under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0. To view this licence, visit OGL or 
                                email psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
                                Images in this document are used under licence and not covered by the Open Government 
                                Licence. Contact copyright holder/s to obtain permission for any further use.
         Public Health England leads the NHS Screening Programmes
