                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                                                                                                                                                            TRAVEL BY LILLINGSTON 
                                                                                                                                                                                          TERMS & CONDITIONS 
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                                                                          TRAVEL BY LILLINGSTON BOOKING CONDITIONS 
                                                                                          The  booking  terms  and  conditions  outlined  below,  along  with  the  General  Information 
                                                                                          contained on our website will govern your (you, your) relationship with (we, our, us). Read 
                                                                                          through them carefully as they set out ours, as well as your respective rights and obligations. 
                                                                                          Your contract is  with  Travel  by  Lillingston  Ltd.  registered  in  England  under  the  Company 
                                                                                          Registration Number 10594904 whose office is registered in Four Folly Mews, 223a Portobello 
                                                                                          Road, London, W11 1LU, United Kingdom.  
                                                                                          We hold an Air Travel Organiser’s Licence (ATOL Number 11503).  
                                                                                          The following booking terms and conditions are only applicable to arrangements made in the 
                                                                                          UK, in which we agree to make or provide the service as part of our contract with you. All 
                                                                                          booking arrangements in this  booking  terms  and  conditions  will  be  referred  to  as  either 
                                                                                          “holiday”, “booking”, “contract”, “tour”, “package” and “arrangements”. In addition to that, 
                                                                                          “you” and “your” will be referred to all persons named on the booking (this includes anyone 
                                                                                          who is added on or substituted by at a later date). “We”, “us” and “our” will be referred to 
                                                                                          Travel by Lillingston Ltd.  
                                                                                          Start date of any arrangements booked with us will be referred to as “departure” or “departure 
                                                                                          date”. These booking conditions will not be applied to any arrangements which we (as your tour 
                                                                                          operator) book for you.  
                                                                                          1. YOUR HOLIDAY BOOKING  
                                                                                          To make a booking and to confirm it, the person making the booking (“group leader”) must 
                                                                                          provide us with all details required, including the payment referred to in Clause 2. The group 
                                                                                          leader may be asked to complete a booking form, and in which must be authorised to make the 
                                                                                          booking on the grounds of this booking condition by all persons named on this booking, 
                                                                                          including consent given by parents/guardians for members who are under 18 when bookings 
                                                                                          are made. By requesting our service to make any bookings, the group leader confirms that 
                                                                                          he/she is over the age of 18, is authorised to do so, and that you accept these booking 
                                                                                          conditions. The group leader is responsible for making any payments due to us. The completed 
                                                                                          booking form must be signed, and then be sent to us along with any payments required. Subject 
                                                                                          to availability, upon receiving all appropriate payments, we will confirm your holiday by issuing 
                                                                                          a confirmation invoice and booking reference. This invoice will be sent to the group leader. 
                                                                                          Kindly read through and check this invoice carefully as soon as you receive it.  
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          Should any information that appears on the confirmation invoice or booking reference appears 
                                                                                          to be incorrect, or incomplete, contact us immediately as it may not be possible to make any 
                                                                                          changes later on. We regret to inform you that we will not be accepting liability if you fail to 
                                                                                          notify us of any inaccuracy in any document within two weeks (14 days) of us sending it out. We 
                                                                                          will do our very best to amend any mistakes notified to us outside these time limits, however, 
                                                                                          you must meet any costs involved in doing so. The only exception to this requirement to cover 
                                                                                          the costs required is where the mistake was made by us and there is a valid reason why you 
                                                                                          failed to notify us within these time limits.  
                                                                                          2. PAYMENT  
                                                                                          In order for us to confirm your chosen holiday, the required deposit date will be confirmed on 
                                                                                          the invoice sent to you. Unfortunately reminders will not be sent. In the case that we do not 
                                                                                          receive all payments due in full and on time, we are entitled to assume that you wish to cancel 
                                                                                          your booking(s). In this case, we will be entitled to keep all deposits paid (or due) at that date. 
                                                                                          If we do not cancel right after because you have promised to make any payments, you (group 
                                                                                          leader) are required to pay the cancellation charges depending on the date we reasonably treat 
                                                                                          your booking as cancelled.  
                                                                                          3. YOUR CONTRACT  
                                                                                          A binding contract will come into existence when we send your confirmation invoice and 
                                                                                          booking reference to the group leader. We both (Travel by Lillingston Ltd. and you) agree that 
                                                                                          the English Law (and no other) will be applied to your contract and to any dispute, claim or any 
                                                                                          other matter between both parties. We both also agree that any dispute, claim or other matter 
                                                                                          between both parties must be dealt with by the courts of England and Wales, unless you reside 
                                                                                          in Northern Ireland or Scotland. In which case, proceedings must either be brought in the courts 
                                                                                          of your home country or those in England and/or Wales. If proceedings are brought in Northern 
                                                                                          Ireland or Scotland, you may choose to have your contract and any dispute, claim or any other 
                                                                                          matter of any description that arises between both parties governed by the law of Northern 
                                                                                          Ireland or Scotland as applicable. However, if you do not choose, English law will be applied.  
                                                                                          4. COSTS OF YOUR HOLIDAY  
                                                                                          We, Travel by Lillingston Ltd., reserve the right to make amendments to and correct errors and 
                                                                                          mistakes in advertised prices at any time before your trip is confirmed. We will thereby advise 
                                                                                          you of any error of which we are aware and of the then applicable price at the time of booking. 
                                                                                          Please note, however, that changes and errors occasionally occur. It is your responsibility to 
                                                                                          check the price of your chosen holiday at the time of booking. Once the price of your chosen 
                                                                                          holiday has been confirmed at the time the booking is made, subject to the correction of errors 
                                                                                          made, we will only increase or decrease the price in the following circumstances. Price increases 
                                                                                          or decreases upon booking will be passed on by way of either a surcharge or refund. The 
                                                                                          surcharge/refund (as applicable) will be payable, subject to the conditions set out in this clause, 
                                                                                          in the event of any change in our transportation costs, or in dues, taxes or fees payable for 
                                                                                          services (such as landing taxes or embarkation/disembarkation fees at ports or airports, or in 
                                                                                          the exchange rates which have been used to calculate the cost of your trip.  
                                                                                          Even in the above cases, only if the amount of any increase in our costs exceed 2% of the total 
                                                                                          cost of your holiday will we impose a surcharge. Should any surcharge be greater than 10% if 
                                                                                          the cost of your booking, you will then be entitled to cancel your booking and receive a full  
                                                                                          
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          refund of all payments made to us (excluding amendment charges), or alternatively, book 
                                                                                          another trip with us (refer to clause 8).  
                                                                                          You have 14 days from the date of the confirmed booking to inform us if you wish to choose 
                                                                                          option (b) or (c) as set out in clause 8. Should you fail to inform us that you wish to choose either 
                                                                                          of these options within this period of time, we are therefore entitled to assume that you no 
                                                                                          longer wish to do so and agree to pay the surcharge. Any surcharge must be paid with the 
                                                                                          balance of the cost of the holiday or within 14 days of the issue date as stated in your surcharge 
                                                                                          invoice, whichever is the later.  
                                                                                          A refund will only be payable should the decrease in our costs exceeds 2% of the entire cost of 
                                                                                          your trip as set out above. In any case where a refund is due, we (Travel by Lillingston Ltd.) will 
                                                                                          pay you the full amount of the decrease in our costs. We promise not to impose a surcharge 
                                                                                          within 30 days of your departure. In addition to that, no refund will be payable if any decrease 
                                                                                          in our costs occurs during this period.  
                                                                                          5. CHANGES BY YOU  
                                                                                          Should you wish to make any changes to your confirmed booking, it is your responsibility to 
                                                                                          notify us in writing as soon as possible. Whilst we will try our very best to assist in your request, 
                                                                                          we cannot guarantee we will be able to meet any such requests. If any case that we are able to 
                                                                                          assist, an amendment fee of £100 per person/booking will be made with any costs incurred by 
                                                                                          ourselves and any costs or charges incurred or imposed by any of our suppliers.  
                                                                                          6. CANCELLATION BY YOU  
                                                                                          In the case where you or any member of your group would need to cancel your booking with us 
                                                                                          once it has been confirmed, the group leader must immediately advise us in writing. Your notice 
                                                                                          of cancellation will only take effect when it is received in writing by us. As we incur costs from 
                                                                                          the time we confirm your booking, the following cancellation charges will be payable. Where 
                                                                                          the cancellation charge is shown as a percentage, this is calculated on the basis of the total cost 
                                                                                          payable by the person cancelling, excluding any amendment charges. Insurance premiums and 
                                                                                          amendment charges are not refundable in the event of the person(s) to whom they apply 
                                                                                          cancelling. For confirmed bookings during blackout dates (i.e. festive season) cancellation is not 
                                                                                          possible without incurring a charge. The charge is individual and depends on the cancelation 
                                                                                          policy of the particular hotel or resort.  
                                                                                          Depending on the situation, and on the reason for cancellation, you may be able to reclaim 
                                                                                          these cancellation charges under the terms referred to in your insurance policy. Claims must be 
                                                                                          made directly to your insurance company. In the case where any cancellation reduces the 
                                                                                          number of full paying party members below the number on which the price, discounts, or other 
                                                                                          concessions agreed for your booking were based, we will thereby recalculate these items and 
                                                                                          send out another invoice accordingly. Should any member of your group be prevented from 
                                                                                          travel- ling, that person may transfer their place to someone else (within your group) providing 
                                                                                          we are notified no less than two weeks before departure. In this case, all costs and charges 
                                                                                          incurred by us and/or incurred or imposed by any of our suppliers as a result together with a fee 
                                                                                          of £100 must be paid before the transfer is effective. For flight inclusive bookings, you are 
                                                                                          responsible to pay the charges imposed by the airline concerned. As most airlines do not permit 
                                                                                          a name change after tickets have been issued, these charges are likely to be the full cost of the 
                                                                                          entire flight(s).  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          7. INSURANCE  
                                                                                          Kindly ensure you purchase an insurance policy that is suitable for your particular needs, and 
                                                                                          provides all the cover required as soon as possible and ideally at the time of booking so that 
                                                                                          you have protection in the event that you would need to cancel for any reason. Please read your 
                                                                                          policy details with care and take them with you on holiday.  
                                                                                          8. CHANGES AND CANCELLATION MADE BY US  
                                                                                          In very rare occasions, we might have to make changes to and to correct errors in website and 
                                                                                          other  details  both  before  and  after  bookings  have  been  confirmed  and  cancel  confirm 
                                                                                          bookings. Whilst it is in our best interest to avoid changes and cancellations, we however, must 
                                                                                          reserve the right to do so. We will however promise to only cancel your confirmed booking 
                                                                                          within 8 weeks or less before departure in the situation where you have failed to comply with 
                                                                                          any requirement of these booking conditions entitling us to cancel. We will not cancel after this 
                                                                                          date for any reason. Most changes are minor, and only in certain cases would we have to make 
                                                                                          a bigger change. This is referred to a change made before departure, which taking account of 
                                                                                          the information you provide us at the time of booking and in which we can reasonably be 
                                                                                          expected to know as a tour operator, we can expect to have a major effect on your holiday. 
                                                                                          These changes are likely to include the following when made before departure; a change of 
                                                                                          accommodation to that of a lower official classification (e.g. 5 star to 4 star) for the majority of 
                                                                                          the time of your holiday, a change of outbound departure time or overall length of time you are 
                                                                                          always  of  twelve  or  more  hours,  a  change  in  UK  departure  point  to  one  which  is  more 
                                                                                          inconvenient for you and your group, and in the case of tours, a significant change or itinerary 
                                                                                          missing out one or more major destination substantially, or altogether.  
                                                                                          If we have to make this change or cancel, we will notify you as soon as possible. Should there 
                                                                                          be time to do so before departure, we will thereby offer you the choice of the following options:-  
                                                                                          (a) accepting the changed arrangements; or  
                                                                                          (b) purchasing an alternative holiday, of a similar standard to that originally booked, subject to 
                                                                                          availability. We will offer you one of the alternative holidays or equivalent or higher standard for 
                                                                                          which you will not be asked to pay any more than the price of the original holiday you purchased. 
                                                                                          If this holiday is cheaper than the original confirmed booking, we will refund the price difference.  
                                                                                          Should you choose to reject the holiday we specifically offer to you, you may choose any of our 
                                                                                          other available holiday. You must therefore, pay the applicable price of such holiday. This will 
                                                                                          mean you paying more if it is more expensive or receiving a full refund if it is cheaper; or  
                                                                                          (c) cancelling or accepting the cancellation in which case you will rice a full refund of all payments 
                                                                                          made to us.  
                                                                                          If we have to make a significant change, or to cancel, we will pay you the compensation (if 
                                                                                          appropriate)  set  out  below  depending  on  the  circumstances  and  where  the  change  or 
                                                                                          cancellation is notified to you subject to the following exemptions. Compensation will not be 
                                                                                          payable and no liability beyond offering the above mentioned choices can be accepted where 
                                                                                          we are forced to make a change or cancel as a result of unusual and unforeseeable circum- 
                                                                                          stances beyond our control, the consequences of which we could not have avoided even with 
                                                                                          all due care. No compensation will be payable and the above options will be not be available if  
                                                                                          
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          we cancel as a result of your failure to comply with any requirement of these booking conditions 
                                                                                          entitled to us to cancel, or if the change made is a minor one. A minor change is referred to any 
                                                                                          change which we can be reasonably be expected to know as a tour operator, we could not 
                                                                                          reasonably expect to have a significant effect on your confirmed holiday.  
                                                                                          In very rare situations will you be forced to change or terminate your holiday after departure but 
                                                                                          before the scheduled end of your time away. This is extremely unlikely, however, if this situation 
                                                                                          foes arise, we regret to inform you that we will be unable to make any refunds (unless we obtain 
                                                                                          any refunds from our suppliers), pay you any compensation or meet any costs or expenses you 
                                                                                          incur as a result.  
                                                                                          9. OUR LIABILITY TO YOU  
                                                                                          (a) We promise to ensure that any arrangements we have agreed to make, perform or provide 
                                                                                          as  applicable  as  part  of  our  contract  with  you  are  made,  performed,  or  provided  with 
                                                                                          exceptional skill and care. Subject to these booking terms and conditions, we will accept 
                                                                                          responsibility in the event that you suffer death or personal injury or your contracted holiday 
                                                                                          arrangements are not provided as promised or prove inadequate as a result of failure of us 
                                                                                          (Travel by Lillingston Ltd., our employees, agents or suppliers) to use reasonable skills and care 
                                                                                          in making. Please also note that it is your responsibility to show that reasonable skill and care 
                                                                                          has not been used if you wish to make a claim against us. We will only be responsible for what 
                                                                                          our employees, agents or suppliers do or do not do if they were at the time acting within the 
                                                                                          course of their employment or carrying out work we had requested of them.  
                                                                                          (b) We will not be held responsible for any injury, illness, death, loss (including loss of personal 
                                                                                          possessions), damage, expense, cost or other sum or claim of any description whatsoever which 
                                                                                          results from any of the following: –  
                                                                                          – the act(s) and/or omission(s) of the person(s) affected or any member(s) of their group/party 
                                                                                          or 
                                                                                          – the act(s) and/or omission(s) of a third party not connected with the provision of your holiday 
                                                                                          and which were unforeseeable or unavoidable  
                                                                                          (c) We cannot accept responsibility for any services not formed under our contract, i.e. any 
                                                                                          additional services or facilities which your hotel or any other supplier agrees to provide for you 
                                                                                          where the services or facilities are not advertised on our website as being included within the 
                                                                                          price paid for your trip, and we have not agreed to arrange for you and any excursion, activities 
                                                                                          or other services you purchase whilst during the duration of your holiday. In addition to that, 
                                                                                          regardless of any wording used by us on our website, we only promise to use reasonable skill 
                                                                                          and care as set out above and we do not have any liability to you.  
                                                                                           (d) The promises we (Travel by Lillingston Ltd.) make to you regarding the services we have 
                                                                                          agreed to provide as part of our contract (and the law and regulations of the country in which 
                                                                                          your claim or complaint has occurred) will be used as grounds for deciding whether the services 
                                                                                          in question had been properly provided. Should the particular service which gave rise to the 
                                                                                          claim or complaint complied with the local laws and regulations applicable to those services at 
                                                                                          the time, the services will be treated as having been properly provided. Note that this will be 
                                                                                          the case even if the services did not comply with the laws and regulations of the United Kingdom 
                                                                                          which would have applied had those services been provided in the United Kingdom. The only 
                                                                                          exception to this is whereby the claim or complaint concerns the absence of a safety feature  
                                                                                          
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          that might lead to a reasonable holiday maker to refuse to take the holiday in question.  
                                                                                          (e) In the case where any claim or part of a claim (including those involving death or personal 
                                                                                          injury) arises in regards to any travel arrangements provided by any air, sea, rail or road carrier 
                                                                                          to  which  any  international  convention  or  EU  regulation  applies,  the  maximum  amount  of 
                                                                                          compensation we will have to pay you will be limited. The maximum amount that we will have 
                                                                                          to pay you for that claim or that part of a claim if we are found liable to you on any basis is the 
                                                                                          most the carrier concerned would have to pay under the international convention or regulation 
                                                                                          that applies to the travel arrangements in question. Kindly note that in the situation where the 
                                                                                          carrier would not be obliged to make any payment to you under the applicable international 
                                                                                          convention or regulation in respect of a claim (or part of it), we will not be obliged to make a 
                                                                                          payment to you for that claim (or part of it). When making any payment, we will be entitled to 
                                                                                          deduct any money which you have received or are entitled to receive from the carrier for the 
                                                                                          complaint or claim in question. *Copies of the international conventions and regulations are 
                                                                                          available upon request.  
                                                                                          (f) We cannot accept any liability for any damage, loss, expense or other sums of any description 
                                                                                          (1) which on the grounds of the information given to us by you regarding your booking prior to 
                                                                                          our accepting it, we could not have foreseen you would suffer or incur if we breached our 
                                                                                          contract with you, or (2) which did not result from any breach of contract or other fault by 
                                                                                          ourselves (Travel by Lillingston Ltd.), our employees or, where we are responsible for them, our 
                                                                                          suppliers. In addition to that, we cannot accept liability for any business losses including self-
                                                                                          employed loss of earnings.  
                                                                                          10. EXCURSIONS, ACTIVITIES AND GENERAL AREA INFORMATION  
                                                                                          We may provide you with information regarding activities, excursions and other services that 
                                                                                          are available in your destination. We have no involvement in such activities that are not run, 
                                                                                          supervised or controlled by us. They are provided by local operators or other third parties who 
                                                                                          are  entirely  independent.  They  do  not  form  any  part  of  your  contract  with  us  (Travel  by 
                                                                                          Lillingston Ltd.), where we suggest third parties or assist you in making a booking for such 
                                                                                          activities  and/or  excursions,  they  can  be  booked  through  your  hotel  or  local  agent  and 
                                                                                          information centres. We cannot therefore accept any liability on any grounds related to such 
                                                                                          activities and the acceptance of liability contained in clause 10 of our booking conditions will 
                                                                                          not apply to them. However, we do not exclude liability for the negligence of ourselves or our 
                                                                                          employees resulting in your death or personal injury. In addition to that, we cannot guarantee 
                                                                                          the accuracy of information given in relation to such activities or about the area you are travelling 
                                                                                          as they are not under our control to do so. We can give advice to you regarding the latest known 
                                                                                          situation at the time of booking upon request.  
                                                                                          11. FORCE MAJEURE  
                                                                                          Except where otherwise expressly stated in these booking conditions, we regret we cannot 
                                                                                          accept liability or pay any compensation where the performance or prompt performance of our 
                                                                                          obligations under our contract with you is prevented or affected by or you otherwise suffer any 
                                                                                          damage, loss or expense of any nature as a result  of “force majeure”. In these booking 
                                                                                          conditions, “force majeure” means any event which we or the supplier of the service(s) in 
                                                                                          question could not, even with all due care, foresee or avoid. Such events may include actual or 
                                                                                          threatened war, riot, civil strife, terrorist activity, industrial dispute, natural or nuclear disaster, 
                                                                                          adverse weather conditions, fire and all similar events outside our control.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          12. COMPLAINTS AND PROBLEMS  
                                                                                          In the unlikely event that you experience any problems with your holiday and have any reason 
                                                                                          to  make  a  complaint,  kindly  inform  our  local  agent  and  the  supplier  of  the  service(s) 
                                                                                          immediately. All verbal notification must be put in writing and must be passed on to our local 
                                                                                          agent as soon as possible. We need to know about a problem and/or complaint before we can 
                                                                                          begin to resolve it. We will try our very best to resolve the issues for you. However, if you remain 
                                                                                          dissatisfied, kindly write to us within 28 days of your return to the United Kingdom, providing 
                                                                                          your booking reference and full details of your complaint. Please bear in mind that only the 
                                                                                          group  leader  is  required  to  write  to  us.  Should  you  fail  to  follow  the  simple  complaints 
                                                                                          procedure, your right to claim compensation you may be entitled to may be affected or even 
                                                                                          lost as a result.  
                                                                                          13. ARBITRATION  
                                                                                          Disputes arising out of your contract which in an unlikely case, cannot be settled may be referred 
                                                                                          to  arbitration  if  you  wish  under  a  special  scheme  arranged  by  ABTA  and  administered 
                                                                                          independently by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators. This scheme provides for a simple and 
                                                                                          inexpensive method of arbitration on documents with restricted liability on the customer in 
                                                                                          respect of costs. Full details will be provided on request can be obtained from the ABTA 
                                                                                          website. This scheme does not apply to claims for an amount greater than £5,000 per person. 
                                                                                          Please note that there is a limit of £25,000 per booking, and it does not apply to claims which 
                                                                                          are solely in respect to physical injury or illness or their consequences. This scheme can deal 
                                                                                          with compensation claims which include an element of minor injury or illness subject to a limit 
                                                                                          of £1,000 on the amount the arbitrator can award per person in respect to this element. The 
                                                                                          application for arbitration and statement of claim must be received by the Chartered Institute 
                                                                                          of Arbitrators within 9 months of the date upon return from your holiday. Outside this time limit, 
                                                                                          arbitration under the scheme may still be available if we agree. 
                                                                                          14. BEHAVIOUR  
                                                                                          Upon booking with us, you agree to accept responsibility for any damage or loss caused by you. 
                                                                                          Full payment for any such damage or loss must be paid direct at the time to the accommodation 
                                                                                          owner, manager or any other supplier. Should the actual cost of the loss or damage exceed the 
                                                                                          amount paid where estimated, you must pay the difference upon knowing. If the actual cost is 
                                                                                          less than the amount paid, the difference will thereby be refunded to you. You also agree to be 
                                                                                          responsible for meeting any claims made against us and all costs incurred by us (including yours, 
                                                                                          and the other party’s legal costs) as a result of your actions. Kindly ensure that you have 
                                                                                          appropriate travel insurance to protect yourself should this situation arise.  
                                                                                          We expect all clients to have considerations for other people. If, in our responsible opinion, or 
                                                                                          in the opinion of any other person in the authority, you behave in such a way as to cause or be 
                                                                                          likely to cause danger, distress or upset to any third party or damage to property, we are entitled 
                                                                                          (without prior notice) to terminate the holiday of the person(s) concerned. As such, the person(s) 
                                                                                          affected or concerned will be required to leave the accommodation or other service. We will 
                                                                                          thereby  have  to  further  responsibility  towards  such  person(s)  including  any  return  travel 
                                                                                          arrangements. No refunds will be made and we will not pay any expenses or costs involved as 
                                                                                          a result of this termination.  
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          15. CONDITIONS OF SUPPLIERS  
                                                                                          Many  of  the  services  that  you  experience  on  your  holiday  are  provided  by  independent 
                                                                                          suppliers. These suppliers provided these services in accordance with their own terms and 
                                                                                          conditions. Some of these terms and conditions may limit or exclude the supplier’s liability to 
                                                                                          you, normally in accordance with applicable International Conventions. Copies of the relevant 
                                                                                          terms and conditions are available upon request from (Travel by Lillingston Ltd.) or the suppliers 
                                                                                          themselves.  
                                                                                          16. SPECIAL REQUESTS AND MEDICAL PROBLEMS  
                                                                                          Should you have any special requests, kindly advise us in writing at the time of booking. 
                                                                                          Although we will try our very best to conform to these requests, we regret to inform you that we 
                                                                                          cannot guarantee that these requests will be met unless we have specifically confirmed this. For 
                                                                                          your own protection, please obtain conformation in writing from us that your request will be 
                                                                                          complied with. Confirmation that a special request has been noted or passed to our suppliers, 
                                                                                          including  the  inclusion  of  the  special  request  on  your  confirmation  invoice  or  any  other 
                                                                                          documentation is not confirmation that the request will be met. Unless specifically confirmed, 
                                                                                          all  special  requests  will  be  subject  to  availability.  We  regret  that  we  cannot  accept  any 
                                                                                          conditional bookings, i.e. any booking that is specified to be conditional on the fulfilment of a 
                                                                                          particular request. All such bookings will thereby be treated as ‘standard’ bookings subject to 
                                                                                          the provisions above on special requests. If you have any medical problems or disability that 
                                                                                          may affect your holiday, including any special requirements as a result of any medical condition 
                                                                                          or disability, kindly inform us before you confirm your booking so that we can advise regarding 
                                                                                          the suitability of the chosen arrangements. In any event, please provide us with full details in 
                                                                                          writing at the time of booking and whenever any change in the medical condition or disability 
                                                                                          occurs. Please also inform us immediately should any medical condition or disability that may 
                                                                                          affect your holiday develops after your booking has been confirmed.  
                                                                                          17. PASSPORTS, VISAS AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS  
                                                                                          The passport, visa and health requirements applicable at the time of printing to British citizens 
                                                                                          for the holidays we offer are shown elsewhere. A full British passport takes approximately 2-6 
                                                                                          weeks to obtain. Should any member of your group not yet have obtained a passport, our 
                                                                                          recommendation to you is that you should apply for one at least 6 weeks before your departure. 
                                                                                          The United Kingdom Passport Service will have to confirm your identity before issuing your first 
                                                                                          passport and will ask you to attend an interview in order for this process to be complete. 
                                                                                          Requirements, however, may change and it is your duty to check the up to date position in good 
                                                                                          time before leaving on your holiday. Information on health is contained in the Department of 
                                                                                          Health leaflet T7 (Health Advice for Travellers) available from your local Department of Health 
                                                                                          by telephone (08701 555455) and in most post offices. It is the group leader’s responsibility to 
                                                                                          ensure that all members of the group are in possession of all necessary travel and health 
                                                                                          documents before departure. All costs incurred in obtaining such documentation must be paid 
                                                                                          by you. We regret to inform you that we cannot accept any liability if you are refused entry onto 
                                                                                          any transport or into any country due to failure on your part to carry correct documentation. If 
                                                                                          any member of your group is not a British citizen, or holds a non-British passport, kindly check 
                                                                                          the passport and visa requirements with the embassy or consulate of the country(ies) to or 
                                                                                          through which you are intending to travel to. If failure to have any necessary travel documents 
                                                                                          results  to  fines  or  surcharges  imposed  on  us,  you  will  be  responsible  for  reimbursing  us 
                                                                                          accordingly.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          18. FINANCIAL SECURITY  
                                                                                          We hold an Air Travel Organiser’s Licence (ATOL number 11503). When you buy an ATOL 
                                                                                          protected flight or flight inclusive holiday from us, you will receive an ATOL Certificate. This lists 
                                                                                          what is financially protected, where you can get information on what this means for you and who 
                                                                                          to contact if things go wrong. We, or the suppliers identified on your ATOL Certificate, will 
                                                                                          provide you with the services listed on the ATOL Certificate (or a suitable alternative).  
                                                                                          In some cases, where neither we nor the supplier are able to do so for reasons of insolvency, an 
                                                                                          alternative ATOL holder may provide you with the services you have bought or a suitable 
                                                                                          alternative  (at  no  extra  cost  to  you).  You  agree  to  accept  that  in  those  circumstances  the 
                                                                                          alternative  ATOL  holder  will  perform  those  obligations  and  you  agree  to  pay  any  money 
                                                                                          outstanding to be paid by you under your contract to that alternative ATOL holder. However, 
                                                                                          you also agree that in some cases it will not be possible to appoint an alternative ATOL holder, 
                                                                                          in which case you will be entitled to make a claim under the ATOL scheme (or your credit card 
                                                                                          issuer where applicable). If we, or the suppliers identified on your ATOL certificate, are unable 
                                                                                          to provide the services listed (or a suitable alternative, through an alternative ATOL holder or 
                                                                                          otherwise) for reasons of insolvency, the Trustees of the Air Travel Trust may make a payment 
                                                                                          to (or confer a benefit on) you under the ATOL scheme. You agree that in return for such a 
                                                                                          payment or benefit you assign absolutely to those Trustees any claims which you have or may 
                                                                                          have arising out of or relating to the non-provision of the services, including any claim against 
                                                                                          us, the travel agent (or your credit card issuer where applicable).You also agree that any such 
                                                                                          claims may be re-assigned to another body, if that other body has paid sums you have claimed 
                                                                                          under the ATOL scheme. For further information, visit the ATOL website at www.atol.org.uk.  
                                                                                          Travel by Lillingston Ltd is a company committed to customer satisfaction and consumer financial 
                                                                                          protection. We are therefore pleased to announce that, at no extra cost to you, and in accordance with 
                                                                                          ''The Package Travel, Package Tours Regulations'' all passengers booking with Travel by Lillingston Ltd 
                                                                                          are fully insured for the initial deposit, and subsequently the balance of monies paid as detailed in your 
                                                                                          booking confirmation form. The policy will also include repatriation if required, arising from the 
                                                                                          cancellation or curtailment of your travel arrangements due to the insolvency of Travel by Lillingston 
                                                                                          Ltd.  This insurance has been arranged by The Travel Vault in conjunction with Towergate Travel 
                                                                                          through Zurich Insurance PLC.  
                                       
                                                                                          Claims 
                                                                                          In the unlikely event of Insolvency, you must Inform Towergate Chapman Stevens immediately on +44 
                                                                                          (0) 1932 334140 or by email at tcs@towergate.co.uk . Please ensure you retain the booking 
                                                                                          confirmation form as evidence of cover and value. 
                                       
                                                                                          Policy exclusions: This policy will not cover any monies paid for Travel Insurance  
                                       
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                          19. WEBSITE ACCURACY  
                                                                                          Kindly note that the information shown on our website may have changed by the time you book 
                                                                                          your holiday with us. Whilst every effort is ensured to see that the accuracy of the website at the 
                                                                                          time of printing, errors do occur however. You (group leader) must therefore ensure to check 
                                                                                          all details of your chosen holiday with us at the time of booking (this included the price of 
                                                                                          holidays). This website is our sole responsibility. It is not issued on behalf of, and does not 
                                                                                          commit any independent organisation/carriers whose services are featured in it.  
                                                                                          20. DELAY AND DENIED BOARDING  
                                                                                          Regrettably, we have to inform you that we are not able to offer you any assistance in the event 
                                                                                          of a delay at your outbound point of departure. The airline concerned may however, provide 
                                                                                          refreshments and in some occasions, accommodation. We are therefore not accepting liability 
                                                                                          for any delay which is due to any of the reasons set out in clause 10 specified in this booking 
                                                                                          terms  and  conditions.  Should  your  flight  be  cancelled  or  delayed,  your  flight  ticket  is 
                                                                                          downgraded, or boarding is denied by your airline in circumstances which would entitle you to 
                                                                                          claim compensation payments or any other payment from the airline under EC Regulation No. 
                                                                                          261/2004 – the Denied Boarding Regulations 2004, it is your responsibility to pursue to airline 
                                                                                          for the compensation or other payment due to you. All monies you receive or are entitled to 
                                                                                          receive from the airline concerned on the grounds of these Regulations represent the full 
                                                                                          amount  of  your  entitlement  to  compensation  or  any  other  payment  arising  from  such 
                                                                                          cancellations, delays, downgrading or denied boarding. This will include any disappointments, 
                                                                                          distress, inconvenience or effect on any other arrangements. The fact that a delay occurs may 
                                                                                          entitle  you  to  cancel  your  flight  does  not  automatically  entitle  you  to  cancel  any  other 
                                                                                          arrangements even where those arrangements have been made in conjunction with your flight. 
                                                                                          We will not accept any liability to make any payment to you in relation to the Denied Boarding 
                                                                                          Regulations or in respect of any flight cancellation or delay, downgrading of any flight ticket or 
                                                                                          denial or any boarding as the full amount of your entitlement to any compensation or other 
                                                                                          payments is covered by the airline’s obligations under the Denied Boarding Regulations. If your 
                                                                                          airline does not comply with the regulations, you should complain to the Air Transport Users’ 
                                                                                          Council on 020 7240 6061, or visit their website at www.auc.org.uk.  
                                                                                          21. SAFETY STANDARDS  
                                                                                          Kindly note that it is the requirements and standards of the country in which any services which 
                                                                                          make up your holiday are provided which apply to those services and not those of the United 
                                                                                          Kingdom. As a general rule, these requirements and standards will not be the same as the 
                                                                                          United Kingdom and may sometimes be lower than expected.  
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                          
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                       
                                                                                           
                                                                                          22. FLIGHTS  
                                                                                          Under the EU Directive (EC) No. 2111/2005 Article 9, we (Travel by Lillingston Ltd.) are required 
                                                                                          to bring to your attention the existence of a ‘community list’ which contains details of air carriers 
                                                                                          who are subject to an operating ban within the European Union. The community list is available 
                                                                                          for inspection at http://ec.europa.eu/trans- port/air-ban/list_en.htm. In addition to that, we are 
                                                                                          also required to advise you of the actual carrier(s) (or the likely carrier(s) that will operate your 
                                                                                          flight(s) at the time of your booking); in this case, we will inform you of the identity of the actual 
                                                                                          carrier(s) as soon as it has come to our attention. You will be notified as soon as possible if there 
                                                                                          are any changes to the operating carrier(s) once your booking has been confirmed. Should the 
                                                                                          carrier with whom you have a confirmed reservation becomes subject to an operating ban, 
                                                                                          we/the carrier are unable to offer you a suitable alter- native, the provisions of clause 8 will apply.  
                                                                                          The flight timings provided on bookings and detailed on your confirmation invoice are for 
                                                                                          general guidance only, it is important to note that this is subject to change. The latest timings 
                                                                                          will be displayed on your tickets which will be dispatched to you approximately two weeks prior 
                                                                                          to departure. You must accordingly check your tickets very carefully immediately on receipt to 
                                                                                          ensure that you have the correct flight times. It is a possibility that the flight times may be 
                                                                                          changed even after tickets have been issued. In the case that this occurs, we will contact you as 
                                                                                          soon as possible to notify you of the change.  
                                                                                          We are not always in a position to confirm the airline, aircraft type and airport of your chosen 
                                                                                          destination which will be used in connection with any flight included in your holiday. This 
                                                                                          information  is  provided  at  the  time  of  making  your  booking  is  subject  to  change  and/or 
                                                                                          availability. Any such change will not entitle you to cancel or change to other arrangements 
                                                                                          without paying our normal charges.  
                                                                                          23. FOREIGN OFFICE ADVICE  
                                                                                          The Foreign and Commonwealth Office published regularly updated travel information on their 
                                                                                          website at www.fco.gov.uk/knowbeforeyougo. You are recommended to visit their website and 
                                                                                          consult before booking, and in good time before your schedule departure.  
                                                                                          
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
