         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
        A True Romance: Reading Erich Segal’s Love Story 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
                              Laura Mäkinen 142 818 
                              Master’s Thesis 
                              Department of English 
                              School of Humanities 
                              University of Eastern Finland 
                              August 2013 
                                ITÄ-SUOMEN YLIOPISTO – UNIVERSITY OF EASTERN FINLAND 
                                 
                                  Tiedekunta –  Faculty                                                             Osasto – School 
                                  Filosofinen tiedekunta                                                            Humanistinen osasto 
                                  Tekijät – Author 
                                  Laura Vilhelmiina Mäkinen 
                                  Työn nimi – Title 
                                  A True Romance: Reading Erich Segal’s Love Story 
                                   Pääaine – Main subject                                          Työn laji – Level                     Päivämä             ärä – Date     S  i vu     mää       rä 
                                  Englannin kieli ja kulttuuri                                                                                                                    – Number 
                                                                                                                                                                                  of pages  
                                                                                                   Pro gradu -tutkielma                   x                                       69 
                                                                                                   Sivuainetutkielma                       
                                                                                                   Kandidaatin tutkielma                   
                                                                                                   Aineopintojen tutkielma                 
                                  Tiivistelmä – Abstract 
                                   
                                  The  aim  of  this  thesis  is  to  demonstrate  that  Erich  Segal’s  Love  Story  is  a  romance  novel  despite  its 
                                  unconventional use of romance elements. The study concentrates on two issues: the romance conventions and 
                                  the portrayal of ethnicity. I begin with the conventions of romance. The presentation of these conventions is 
                                  divided into two sections. First I discuss the history of the romance genre in order to show the conventions of 
                                  romance that have characterized the genre from its beginning. Second I examine the formula of romance that is 
                                  distinctive  to  more  contemporary  romance  novels.  In  the  third  theory  section  of  my  thesis  I  address  the 
                                  portrayal of intercultural relationships in literature.  
                                   
                                  The analysis of Love Story is divided into three sections.  In the first section I concentrate on the romance 
                                  elements that stem from the early form the Greek or Classic romances. I argue that despite the unconventional 
                                  romance ending of Love Story, it contains plenty of other romance elements. I also argue that the ending of the 
                                  novel is not significantly unconventional: while it is sad it is not without hope. In the second section I analyse 
                                  Love Story based on the formula for popular romance. I analyse both its plot and its representation of the hero 
                                  and the heroine. In the final section of my analysis I discuss the role of ethnicity in  Love Story. The ethnic 
                                  heroine of the novel seems to attain the American Dream when she marries the WASP hero, but in reality she 
                                  disappears behind her husband’s success.  
                                   
                                  In the final chapter of my thesis I conclude with my findings as well as present further research topics such as 
                                  the oedipal relationship between the novel’s hero and his father. 
                                  Avainsanat – Keywords 
                                  Erich Segal, Love Story, romance, formula, ethnicity 
                                                         
                                                                                      
          Contents 
           
          1. Introduction………………………………………………………………………1 
             1.1 Erich Segal…………………………………………………………….…..2 
             1.2 Love Story…................................................................................................3 
          2. The Theory of Romance………………………………………………………….6 
             2.1 Origins of Romance…………………………………………………….....7 
             2.2 Formula for Popular Romance…………………………………………..14 
             2.3 Intermarriage in Romance……………………………………………….25 
          3. Analysing Love Story……………………………………………………………35 
             3.1 Origins of Love Story………………………………………………….…35 
             3.2 Formula for Love Story……………………………………………….….44 
             3.3 Intermarriage in Love Story………………………………….……….….56 
          4. Conclusion……………………………………………………………...…….....63 
          References………………………………………………………………………….66 
          Finnish Summary…………………………………………………………………..70 
                           
                            1 
         
        1. Introduction 
         
        Romance literature has for a long time been considered to be a ‘low’ genre. “Romantic 
        fiction  is  so  stigmatised  at  present  that  it  has  received  very  little  academic  attention” 
        (Fowler  1).  Although  romance  literature  has  since  the  1990s  attained  more  academic 
        attention, it is still stigmatised as Jayne Ann Krentz’s claim “[f]ew people realize how 
        much courage it takes for a woman to open a romance novel on an airplane” shows (1). It 
        can be argued that romance has this stigma since romance novels are entertainment by 
        women for women. It is this connection that Strehle and Carden claim was done much 
        earlier: “[b]y 1739, writing what some consider the first novel, Richardson [...] formed the 
        dismissive connection between ‘girls,’ ‘romances,’ ‘idle stuff,’ and forms of behaviour in 
        which men‒sensible, worldly men‒believed they had no part” (xv). “The impulse […] to 
        attach the romance derisively to women and women derisively to romance has led critics to 
        denigrate the genre of romance” (Strehle and Carden xv). As Krentz claims, “[w]hen it 
        comes to romance novels, society has always felt free to sit in judgment not only on the 
        literature but on the reader herself” (1). Erich Segal, the author of Love Story, might have 
        argued that it should include the author as well. 
           In this thesis I will analyse Erich Segal’s Love Story. My aim is to demonstrate that 
        Love Story is a romance novel as its title implies. I will discuss the romance genre and 
        describe and analyse the generic conventions used in Love Story. The issue is important 
        because  Love  Story  has  elements  that  are  not  typical  for  romances  such  as  the  novel 
        continues after the couple marry and the heroine dies in the end. In order to analyse these 
        elements I will firstly explain what the conventions of romance are. I will begin with the 
        theory of romance and then apply it to my analysis of Love Story. I have divided the theory 
        of romance into three sections: the history of romance literature, the formulaic nature of 
                            2 
         
        popular  romance  novels,  and  the  treatment  of  intercultural  relationships  in  romance 
        literature. Firstly, I will give a short account of the history of romance in order to show the 
        conventions of romance that have characterized the genre for centuries. Secondly, I will 
        discuss the formula that is distinctive for more contemporary popular romance novels. The 
        formula  includes  two  sides:  a  more  universal  plot  type  and  stereotypical  characters. 
        Thirdly, I will discuss how intercultural relationships are portrayed in romances and what 
        their function is. 
           After discussing the theory I will analyse Segal’s Love Story. My analysis is also 
        divided into three sections: I will first address the romance conventions in Love Story, 
        second the formula of Love Story, and then the role of exotic ethnicity in Love Story. The 
        thesis will close with a concluding chapter. 
         
         
        1.1 Erich Segal 
         
        Love Story, the first novel by Erich Segal, was initially written as a screenplay and later 
        adapted into a novel and published on 4 February 1970. The novel became a best-seller 
        before  the  movie  was  released  later  the  same  year.  The  movie  became  a  success  and 
        “scor[ed] at the box-office, where it became the most profitable film since Gone With the 
        Wind” (Pelzer 20).  
           Erich Segal was an academic who taught Greek and Latin literature at Yale, Harvard 
        and Princeton Universities. As Linda C. Pelzer writes, 
         
             [i]n addition to his study of Plautus, Segal […] edited a collection of critical 
             essays on the Greek playwright Euripides and […] translated three of Plautus’s 
                            3 
         
             comedies, earning praise for both his style and his interpretations. He […] also 
             edited books on Plato, Caesar Augustus, and Greek tragedy. He was awarded a 
             Guggenheim Fellowship in 1968.  (3) 
              
        The success of Love Story affected Segal’s credibility as a scholar, and he “agreed to take a 
        leave of absence from his teaching position at Yale” (Pelzer 6). Love Story was nominated 
        for  the  1971  National Book Award, “one of the most prestigious literary prizes in the 
        United States,” but “five judges on the award’s fiction panel threatened to resign if it were 
        not eliminated” (Pelzer 5). Pelzer claims that the novelist William Styron, who was one of 
        the jurors, “justified the decision, noting that ‘it is a banal book which simply doesn’t 
        qualify as literature’” (5). Before his death in January 2010, Segal had moved to England 
        and was a teacher at Wolfson College in Oxford. 
         
         
        1.2 Love Story 
         
        Segal’s novel Love Story depicts the first person story of Oliver Barrett IV, who comes 
        from a family that has been wealthy and respected for generations. Oliver follows the 
        family tradition of studying at Harvard and becoming a Harvard jock (i.e., someone who 
        enjoys sports or is good at it). Since the Barretts are a conservative family, Oliver struggles 
        to find his own identity and independence from his father.  
           Oliver  meets  and  falls  in  love  with  Jennifer  Cavilleri,  a  working-class  Italian 
        American  girl,  who  is  a  music  major  at  Radcliffe  College.  When  they  decide  to  get 
        married, Oliver’s father opposes and eventually ends his financing of Oliver’s studies. 
        Thus Jennifer, who has already graduated, becomes a teacher in order to support Oliver 
                            4 
         
        while he studies at Harvard Law School. They struggle with money until after Oliver’s 
        graduation when he takes a well-paying position at a law firm. The financial troubles now 
        in the past, the lovers decide to start a family. When Jennifer does not get pregnant, in spite 
        of their attempts, the couple seeks medical help only to find out that Jennifer is seriously ill 
        and bound to die. Jennifer has to begin a costly cancer therapy which Oliver eventually 
        becomes unable to afford. His only choice is to seek assistance from his father who agrees 
        to help although Oliver does not provide the real reason for his financial need. Oliver’s 
        father discovers later that Jennifer is ill and he goes to the hospital. What he discovers is 
        that Jennifer has died only moments ago, and the novel ends with Oliver crying in his 
        father’s arms. 
           According to the American Legends Interviews, “[t]he reviewer for the Los Angeles 
        Times, Ron Martinetti, wrote: ‘Although one can easily summarize the gist of Segal’s plot, 
        his style presents a more difficult problem. What, for example, can one make of an author 
        who has filled his book with page after page of the most tiresome clichés (‘You can dish it 
        out, but you can’t take it’)?” (online). Martinetti was not the only reviewer who critiqued 
        Erich Segal’s use of clichés. In Erich Segal’s obituary, Margalit Fox quotes Oberbeck who 
        wrote in the Newsweek: “The banality of ‘Love Story’ makes ‘Peyton Place’’ look like 
        ‘Swann’s Way’ as it skips from cliché to cliché with an abandon that would chill even the 
        blood of a True Romance editor” (online).  
           Although most reviewers did not appreciate  Love  Story  it  was,  according  to  the 
        American Legends Interviews, “favorably reviewed in the New York Times by Christopher 
        Lehmann-Haupt, and received a plug from Kurt Vonnegut, then a popular author among 
        the young, who found the book ‘…as hard to put down as a chocolate éclair…’” (online). 
           Pelzer claims that “Love Story is […] a tale of two loves,” but she continues by 
        declaring  that  “[t]o  his  rather  typical  story  of  romantic  love,  Segal  crafts  a  more 
                            5 
         
        compelling tale of filial love that is ultimately the real story of Love Story” (19). Although 
        the  father  and  son  relationship  in  Love  Story  deserves  to  be  acknowledged,  I  am  not 
        convinced it is the novel’s ‘real story.’ I will discuss this in my analysis of Love Story but 
        first I will begin with the theory of romance. 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
                            6 
         
        2. The Theory of Romance 
         
        The genre of romance has been the cause for much debate, since literary theorists have not 
        been able to agree whether romance is a genre, formula, mode or strategy. As Barbara 
        Fuchs writes in Romance, “[c]ritics disagree [...] about its origins and history, even about 
        what it encompasses” (1). These difficulties of establishing romance as a genre stem from 
        the changes romances have gone through: the male protagonist setting out on adventures 
        has transformed into a modern heroine looking for true love. Heidi Hansson, the author of 
        Romance Revived, presents another reason for the difficulty: the term ‘romance’ “is used to 
        describe both a literary form and a literary quality” (11). As Jean Radford writes: 
         
             [i]t is possible to argue about ‘romance’ [...] that the only continuity is in the 
             term:  that  there  is  no  historical  relationship  between  Greek  ‘romances’, 
             medieval romance, Gothic bourgeois romances of the 1840s, late nineteenth 
             century women’s romances and mass-produced romance fiction now ‒ except 
             the generic term. (8)  
              
           Although  Radford  states  this  possibility,  she  does  not  agree  with  it  herself  and 
        neither do I. I will examine the history of romance, its origins, and the differences and 
        similarities in various forms of romance. I will do this in order to point out two important 
        issues. Firstly, I want to indicate that although there are differences in the types of romance 
        produced throughout the history of the genre, there are also similarities. Secondly, I want 
        to make evident that romance has a history of referring back to older texts and repeating 
        and rewriting them. 
                            7 
         
           I will also discuss the formula for popular romance, i.e., “the structure of narrative or 
        dramatic conventions employed in a great number of individual works” (Cawelti 5). In this 
        section  I  will  present  in  detail  the  structure  and  conventions  used  in  popular  romance 
        novels as opposed to the use of such conventions in romance literature. 
           In  the  last  section  of  this  chapter  I  will  discuss  ethnicity  and  inter-ethnic 
        relationships/marriages in romances and literature. I will begin by background information 
        on the attitude towards ethnicity in the United States of America at the time Love Story was 
        written. After that, I will discuss theories on ethnicity and how ethnicity is portrayed in 
        literature. I shall also give examples of intercultural romantic relationships as displayed in 
        literary narratives. 
         
         
        2.1 Origins of Romance 
         
        It is debated whether romance is a genre, a strategy or a mode but what is agreed upon is 
        that  romance  has  some  typical  conventions  that  have  been  characteristic  to  it  since 
        Homer’s Odyssey. Hubert McDermott claims that Odyssey is the first romance and “the 
        archetype [...] of all great romance” (12). Not all agree that Odyssey is the first romance 
        but the importance of Odyssey to romance literature is not questioned since, according to 
        Fuchs, it “establishes some of the most enduring and recurring of romance strategies” (14). 
           It is the presence of these strategies, or conventions of romance, that can be found in 
        Odyssey, which has led McDermott to claim that “[a]ny discussion of Greek romance must 
        inevitably begin with Homer’s Odyssey” since it is “archetypal in that it sets the pattern for 
        all  subsequent  romances,  whether in  the  design  of  the  narrative  or  the  use  of  specific 
        scenes and incidents to symbolise primary human experiences” (12). The conventions of 
                            8 
         
        romance  that  have  their  origin  in  the  Odyssey  and  continue  in  Greek  romances  are, 
        according to McDermott, the following ones: the protagonists’ “private story of domestic 
        and adventurous life”, the introduction of love and sexuality (although “the love presented 
        is a mature love between a couple who have been married for a very long time”), and the 
        happy ending which McDermott attests to be found in every Greek romance (13-14). Fuchs 
        has a slightly different approach on romance as she points to the existence of the following 
        romance  elements  of  Greek  (or  what  she  calls  the  Classic)  romances:  “occluded  and 
        subsequently revealed identities, idealized protagonists, marvels and monsters, tasks and 
        tests”  (36).  She  mentions  these  elements  in  particular  since  in  her  view  their  “striking 
        repetition […] in medieval romance suggests that, regardless of its critical reception then 
        and now, classical romance had a long and influential afterlife” (36). 
           Medieval romance as a term originally meant the transformation of Latin texts, such 
        as Greek and Roman legends and certain classical texts, into romance languages (Fuchs 37, 
        39).  What this  means is  that  some  or  many  of  the  medieval  romances  are  older  texts 
        rewritten in French. They are not purely translated but also transformed to fit in a different 
        time and place (Fuchs 50-51). Fuchs writes that the medieval romance 
         
             is  conventionally  defined  as  the  group  of  narratives  in  the  vernacular  that 
             emerge around 1150 in the court of Henry II  and Eleanor of Aquitaine in 
             England [...] and tell stories of love and adventure. Although generally situated 
             in a distant classical or Arthurian past, the stories feature all the trappings of 
             contemporary  court  and  chivalric  culture,  so  that,  for  example,  Greek  and 
             Roman “knights” skirmish in patently medieval tournaments. (39) 
         
                            9 
         
        The court is such an important setting for romances of this era that they are often described 
        as  romances  of  courtly  love  (McDermott  100).  Another  important  characteristic  for 
        medieval  romances  is  idealization,  which  according  to  Fuchs,  is  accounted  for  by  the 
        above-mentioned  courtly  setting  (40).  Although  the  medieval  romance  does  not  differ 
        much from the earlier form of romance, medieval writers like Malory and Chaucer did 
        treat romantic love in a more realist way, as suggested by Lynne Pearce (35). She states in 
        her book Romance Writing that  
         
             the trials and adventures that constitute a test of chivalry in early romance are 
             refigured [in Chaucer's Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385) and in Malory’s Morte 
             d’Arthur (1485)] as the psychological challenges of romantic love itself. Love, 
             at  last,  becomes  the  true  object  of  the  romance  genre,  and  the  fantastical 
             ‘external’  challenges  facing  earlier  knights  now  re-shape  themselves  as  the 
             doubts and demons of the lover’s interior consciousness. (Pearce 35; italics 
             original) 
               
        This highlighting of the knights’ experience of love in medieval romances is mentioned 
        also by Fuchs, and she adds to the distinctive features of medieval romances that “there is a 
        much greater emphasis on the private over the public [and] on the perspective of women” 
        (39).  Heidi  Hansson  discusses  women’s  role  in  medieval  romances  in  more  detail. 
        According to Hansson, 
         
             Medieval romances often elevate women to quite impossible status, and the 
             image of the unattainable but always desirable woman provides the tension and 
             propels the plot in romances from the Middle Ages onwards. The lady of the 
                            10 
         
             courtly romance has a power unknown to most medieval women, even though 
             this  power  resides  almost  exclusively  in  the  emotional  sphere.  There  is  an 
             inherent paradox in the romance: it is the literary genre which most clearly 
             seems to restrict Woman by defining her place and identity, at the same time as 
             it is the genre where women’s power is acknowledged. (83) 
              
        The desirability of a woman makes her powerful because it makes her capable of seducing 
        men. Hansson continues by stating that “Woman is frequently perceived as a threat to male 
        bonding or to a man’s honour, as when Lancelot betrays his lord Arthur by committing 
        adultery with Guinevere, or as in the story of Tristan and Isolde. Women threaten the 
        social order because they are desirable, and consequently dangerous” (84).  
           This  emphasis  on  women  continues  in  the  Renaissance  period  when  “women 
        increasingly took the title roles in prose romance” (Pearce 36). Although the romances of 
        courtly love continued their success in the sixteenth century, the century was also marked 
        by the rediscovery of the Greek romances, which were widely translated and imitated in 
        Europe (McDermott 106, Fuchs 66). After the sixteenth century there also seems to be a 
        shift  from only male authors of romance to both male and female authors of romance. 
        Female writers such as Madeleine de Scudéry, Margaret Cavendish, and Lady Mary Wroth 
        are mentioned by Hubert McDermott and Lynne Pearce. 
           Don  Quixote,  the  famous  novel  that  affected  the  development  of  romance,  was 
        written in the early seventeenth century. Although it is not a romance, it is important for 
        the history of romance literature since it parodies medieval romances and their popularity 
        (McDermott 104, Fuchs 78). Virginia Brackett defines Don Quixote (1605) as an anti-
        romance in which Cervantes “simultaneously restructured the romance, offering new ways 
        to  adapt  its  elements”  (xiii).  Brackett  continues  that  “Cervantes  places  [romance 
                            11 
         
        conventions] in a different context, thereby redefining and renewing their usefulness in 
        romantic writings” (288). Although literary scholars disagree on several points, they all 
        claim the importance of Don Quixote for the romance in the seventeenth century as it 
        marks the beginning of the critique of the genre. As Fuchs states: 
         
             [t]he  trajectory  of  romance  after  the  Renaissance  is  complex  and  often 
             paradoxical. While Greek and chivalric romance, in particular, continued to 
             prove  hugely  popular  with  readers,  critical  predilection  for  new  kinds  of 
             narrative fiction led from an initial embrace of French “heroic” romance in the 
             seventeenth  century  to  the  gradual  marginalization  of  romance  as  a  “low” 
             genre in subsequent periods. (99) 
         
        McDermott claims that the French ‘heroic’ romance’s “most obvious difference [from the 
        Greek romance] is the change in the handling of the theme of love”, and he mentions 
        virtue, propriety, and duty as the innovations of the French romance (115‒6). Virtue and 
        propriety found in the French romance displace ‘passion’ from the center of romance: “the 
        rhetorical  admixture  of  the  spiritual  and  the  sexual  that  we  find  here  [still  in  the 
        seventeenth century] becomes increasingly polarized in the course of the next century, and 
        the residual ideology of courtly love will bear the echo of a bygone age” (Pearce 55). 
           To use Fuchs’s words, “the trajectory of romance” persists on its complexity after the 
        seventeenth  century.  Although  the  genre  “breaks  down  into  a  number  of  quite 
        distinguishable  subgenres,”  in  Hansson’s  view  those  subgenres  “belong  to  a  common 
        tradition” (29). With the printing press and the novel’s ability to reach various people, the 
        readership of romance expands rapidly. This leads to different demands for romance. On 
        one hand, romance readers desire seduction and, on the other hand, they wish for more 
                            12 
         
        virtuous heroines. These demands can be seen in Pearce's claim that the eighteenth century 
        romances  can  be  roughly  divided  into  three  types:  the  Gothic  romance,  the  courtship 
        romance, and the seduction romance (62). According to Fuchs, the Gothic romance is 
        “[f]rom its beginnings [...] explicitly presented as a mixture of new and old” (119). The 
        history of romance is full of repetition as one can once again notice with the continual of 
        medieval elements in Gothic romances: “what makes the Gothic so popular is precisely its 
        gallery of marvelous and otherworldly topoi” (Fuchs 121). 
           Although  romance  literature  relies  on  its  iterability,  it  also  faces  changes.  The 
        courtship romance “severs sex from love and sends it underground, and we have to wait 
        until the end of [the eighteenth] century ‒ and the beginning of the next ‒ for [...] elusive 
        ‘it’  to  once  again  make  its  appearance”  (Pearce  55).  The  Gothic  and  the  courtship 
        romances have obtained the attention in the eighteenth century to such an extent that the 
        seduction romance is less known and it can come as a shock for those used to reading “the 
        canonical texts of school and university syllabi” (Pearce 77). Pearce quotes Delarivière 
        Manley, “one of the true ‘bad girls’ of eighteenth-century literature”, and “her blacklisted 
        novel The New Atalantis (1709)”: 
         
             But the Duke's pursuing kisses overcame the thoughts of anything but the new 
             and lazy poison stealing to her heart and spreading swiftly and imperceptibly 
             through all her veins; she closed her eyes with languishing delight! delivered 
             up the possession of her lips and breath to the amorous invader, returned his 
             eager grasps and, in a word, gave her whole person into his arms in meltings of 
             delight! (qtd in Pearce 77) 
               
                            13 
         
        It is important to be aware that texts such as the above exist, in order “to fully understand 
        the origins of twentieth-century Mills & Boon fiction” (Pearce 77). 
           Mills & Boon fiction or ‘Harlequin romances’ are terms often used when discussing 
        popular romance novels. Their name comes from an extremely successful publishing house 
        that produces romances in a steady supply. Their sale “make[s] up more than half of all 
        sales in popular paperback fiction [...] in North America” (Fuchs 124). Pearce connects 
        popular romance novels and the seduction romance because “it is clear that its [Mills & 
        Boon  fiction’s]  bodice-ripping,  soft-porn  elements  owe  a  very  obvious  debt  to  these 
        subcultural prototypes” (77). Pearce goes on claiming that  
         
             [i]n terms both of erotic scenario and, even more importantly, of the control of 
             the protagonists’/reader’s gaze, Manley’s story of the innocent ‒ but infinitely 
             corruptible ‒ young virgin, Charlot, looks ahead to any number of Mills & 
             Boon fantasies in which a fatherly rake eventually has his wicked way with his 
             initially resistant, but then yielding, object of desire. (77) 
         
           While these popular romances, at first, seem to be far from the Greek and medieval 
        romances, they are also considered to be romances in their own right. In Fuchs’s view the 
        reason for this is that these narratives combine various elements found in the earlier forms: 
        “they are often characterized by a nostalgic vision of the past, a relentlessly idealizing tone, 
        and an emphasis on the female sphere, from a female protagonist to a view of the world 
        organized around love” (125). Fuchs also states that “the female heroine is of central 
        importance,  as  is  the  authorial  voice  implied  in  association’s  assumption  of  a  female 
        writer” (125). She continues that “[m]en may well write romance novels pseudonymously, 
        but they must be published under female names” (125). 
                            14 
         
           Modleski points out that “[l]ike the Harlequins of the present day, the [sentimental] 
        novels  repeatedly  insisted  on  the  importance  of  the  heroine’s  virginity.  In  the  classic 
        formula, the heroine, who is often of lower social status than the hero, holds out against his 
        attacks on her ‘virtue’ until he sees no other recourse than to marry her” (17). Fuchs also 
        comments on this formula and by stating that “like chivalric romances, romance novels are 
        remarkably iterable: their familiarity, as variations on a basic narrative, is a large part of 
        what makes them so appealing to readers” (125). It is this “basic narrative” ‒ the formula 
        of the romance ‒ that I will concentrate on in the following section. 
         
         
        2.2 The Formula for Popular Romance 
         
        In the previous section I discussed the conventions of romance literature that have been 
        typical for it since the Greek romances. In this section, I will discuss the conventions or 
        formulas that are typical for popular romance novels. According to Cawelti, “there are two 
        common usages of the term formula” (5). I will discuss them both since “popular story 
        type[s]…combine[…] these two sorts of literary phenomenon” (Cawelti 6). Thus they are 
        rather two different sides of one single formula. I will, however, deal with the two sides 
        separately in order to simplify matters. 
           Firstly, I will discuss the usage of the term formula that, according to Cawelti, “refers 
        to larger plot types” (5). I will also examine the structure of popular romance narratives in 
        order to show a more detailed ‘plot type’ that is typical for romances. Secondly, I will 
        discuss the usage of the term formula that, according to Cawelti, “denotes a conventional 
        way of treating some specific thing or person” (5). Cawelti extends this definition also to 
        “any cultural stereotype found in literature” (5). I will relate this type of formula to popular 
                            15 
         
        romance novels by discussing the conventional way in which the hero and heroine of 
        romance are treated in those novels and the cultural stereotypes that they represent. 
           As I established above, the term formula refers to both the “conventional way of 
        treating some specific thing or person” and “larger plot types” (Cawelti 5). In Cawelti’s 
        view, the significant difference between these two definitions of a formula is that the first 
        is used to refer “to patterns of conventions which are usually quite specific to a particular 
        culture and period and do not mean the same outside this specific context” (5). The latter 
        definition, on the other hand, refers to more universal plot patterns that “have certainly 
        been popular in many different cultures at many different times” (Cawelti 6). The typical 
        formula or plot pattern for the romance narrative is that a boy and a girl meet, they fall in 
        love, the course of their relationship encounters obstacles but the couple eventually solves 
        the problems, marry, and the narrative ends with the impression that they will live happily 
        ever after. Ann Rosalind Jones also introduces “a summary of a typical romance plot” that, 
        according to her, has “been stabilized in the genre and is still used by older writers” (198). 
        According to Jones, it can be presented as follows: 
         
             The heroine, a virgin in her early twenties, is set in a social limbo: her family is 
             dead or invisible, her friends are few or none, her occupational milieu is only 
             vaguely filled in. As a result, her meeting with the hero occurs in the private 
             realm which excludes all concerns but their mutual attraction; the rest of the 
             world drops away except as a backdrop (often exotic and luxurious, defined 
             through the hero’s wealth and taste). The hero, seven to ten years older than the 
             heroine, is dazzlingly successful in the public world; in private life he is a rake 
             or  a  mystery,  saturnine  in  appearance,  sexually  expert,  and  relentlessly 
             domineering. He takes the reins erotically, naming the heroine’s desires to her 
                            16 
         
             (‘You know you want me, why resist?’); all she can do is submit or flee. She 
             tries  constantly  to  interpret  his  behavior,  which  alternates  abruptly  between 
             tenderness and rejection. Finally, after a separation, the hero tracks the heroine 
             down, explains his earlier motives and offers her love and marriage. They fall 
             into a final embrace… (198‒9) 
              
        Jones does not mention in her plot outline the heroine’s financial status but she is usually 
        poor, while the hero, as Jones describes, is wealthy. In Modleski’s view this presents the 
        main reason for the events that are about to follow: 
         
             While the novels are always about a poor girl finally marrying a rich man, 
             preferably of the nobility, they must be careful to show that the girl never set 
             out to get him and his goods. This is of course a simple reflection of the double 
             bind imposed upon women in real life: their most important achievement is 
             supposed to be finding a husband; their greatest fault is attempting to do so. 
             (48) 
         
        According  to  Modleski,  because  women  are  supposed  to  have  this  ulterior  motive  of 
        finding a rich husband, in romance narratives the heroine is often portrayed as immune to 
        the hero’s charm: “the heroines are usually ‘determined to hate’ the hero for his impossible 
        arrogance, a quality he possesses only because of his economic security‒unlike the rest of 
        us, he bows to no man” (49). Modleski continues that “[t]he woman’s determination to 
        hate the hero at once absolves her of her mercenary motives and becomes the very means 
        by which she obtains the hero’s love, and, consequently, his fortune” (49). 
                            17 
         
           Janice A. Radway, the author of Reading the Romance, has a different approach to 
        the formula of romance narrative. She interviewed for her book a group of women who are 
        enthusiastic romance readers. The women all live in a place called Smithton – hence they 
        are  called  the  Smithton  women.  Radway  discovered  the  Smithton  women’s  favourite 
        novels  and  applied  “Vladimir  Propp’s  method  for  determining  the  essential  narrative 
        structure of folktales” (133) to them. Thus Radway resulted in “a list of thirteen logically 
        related functions”: 
               
             1. The heroine’s social identity is destroyed. 
             2. The heroine reacts antagonistically to an aristocratic male. 
             3. The aristocratic male responds ambiguously to the heroine. 
             4. The heroine interprets the hero’s behavior as evidence of a purely sexual 
             interest in her. 
             5. The heroine responds to the hero’s behavior with anger or coldness. 
             6. The hero retaliates by punishing the heroine. 
             7. The heroine and the hero are physically and/or emotionally separated. 
             8. The hero treats the heroine tenderly. 
             9. The heroine responds warmly to the hero’s act of tenderness. 
             10. The heroine reinterprets the hero’s ambiguous behaviour as the product of 
             previous hurt. 
             11.  The  hero  proposes/openly  declares  his  love  for/demonstrates  his 
             unwavering commitment to the heroine with a supreme act of tenderness. 
             12. The heroine responds sexually and emotionally. 
             13. The heroine’s identity is restored. (134) 
         
                            18 
         
        These  thirteen  functions  provide  a  summary  of  “the  narrative  structure  of  the  ideal 
        romance” as  well  as  describe  “the  heroine’s  transformation  from  an  isolated,  asexual, 
        insecure adolescent who is unsure of her own identity, into a mature sensual, and very 
        married woman who has realized her full potential and identity as the partner of a man and 
        as the implied mother of a child” (Radway 134). Pearce describes Radway’s study as a 
        “ground-breaking ethnographic study of (female) popular romance readers” (12). Pearce 
        goes  as  far  as  to  claim  that  “there  are  very  few  Hollywood  Romances  that  depart 
        significantly from […] Radway’s list of functions” (13).  
           The Smithton women allege that Erich Segal’s Love Story is not a romance, since “a 
        romance is first and foremost, a story about a woman” (Radway 64). Radway continues 
        that “[t]hat woman, however, may not figure in a larger plot simply as the hero’s prize, as 
        Jenny Cavileri does, for instance in Erich Segal’s Love Story” (64). She also states that 
        “[t]o qualify as a romance, the story must chronicle, not merely the events of a courtship 
        but what it feels like to be the object of one” (Radway 64; emphasis original). Love Story is 
        written from the hero’s point of view and as a first-person narrative and it thus fails the 
        Smithton women’s requirement for romance. Nevertheless, it is the list of functions that in 
        Radway’s  view  reveals  the  ideal  romance,  and  as  the  functions  on  Radway’s  list  are 
        collected from the novels the Smithton women enjoy the most, I feel it important to base 
        one aspect of my analysis of Love Story on Radway’s categories. Thus I will note whether 
        the Smithton women have any basis for their claim. 
           As the structure of romance narratives has now been covered, I shall turn to the other 
        side of a formula: the treatment of specific things or persons as well as commonly used 
        cultural stereotypes. Cawelti stresses that with this kind of usage of the term formula it is 
        imperative  to  notice  “that  it  refers  to  patterns  of  conventions  which  are  usually  quite 
        specific to a particular culture and period and do not mean the same outside this specific 
                            19 
         
        context” (5). Cawelti offers as an example the transformation of “the nineteenth-century 
        formulaic relation between blondness and sexual purity […] in the twentieth century to a 
        very different formula for blondes” (5). 
           The  formula  for  the  hero  and  heroine  has  also  changed  in  the  course  of  time. 
        Deborah Philips describes the period when Love Story was written as follows: 
         
             The period from the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s saw the burgeoning 
             of  a  genre  of  women’s  writing  which  dated  back  to  the  early  1960s:  the 
             narrative of a young woman who leaves home to go to university, and who 
             there encounters a wide world of intellectual and romantic opportunity. The 
             ‘college girl narrative’ became a publishing phenomenon in both Britain and 
             America, coinciding with a growth in higher education and with an increase in 
             the numbers of women students. (Philips 55) 
              
        Thus during this period it was typical for the heroine to be a college girl. Philips also 
        acknowledges that “[t]he fact that women were in the minority in higher education made 
        for a particular kind of heroine in the campus novel: the intelligent achieving woman” (56). 
        Though these narratives were popular in both Britain and America, there was a difference 
        in style because 
         
             [t]he American student, however, was reliant on scholarships or family help to 
             fund a college education. The issue of financial support and the difference that 
             this  can  make  to  a  choice  of  university  is  on  the  agenda  in  the  American 
             version  of  the  college  narrative,  and  families  have  a  greater  financial  and 
             emotional hold over the student. (Philips 64)  
                            20 
         
         
        Philips also notes that “the woman undergraduate became a regular heroine for popular 
        novels” (64). Philips describes Love Story as a “hugely successful novel of college life and 
        inter-class romance” that “established the American college girl as a fashion and romantic 
        icon” (64). 
           The intelligent and achieving American college woman coincides with the demands 
        the Smithton women have for a heroine, since Radway observes that “the Smithton readers 
        describe  their  favorite  heroines  as  ‘intelligent,’  ‘spunky,’  and  ‘independent’”  (125). 
        Radway translates this to mean that “the ideal heroine is differentiated from her more 
        ordinary  counterparts  in  other  romance  novels  by  unusual  intelligence  or  by  an 
        extraordinarily  fiery  disposition”  (123).  Although  the  heroine  is  often  spunky,  she  is 
        nevertheless  “always  portrayed  as  unusually  compassionate,  kind  and  understanding” 
        (Radway  127).  Radway  also  highlights  that  the  ideal  heroine  possesses  extraordinary 
        beauty as well as has a skill that differentiates her from other women (124). Radway also 
        names  many  heroines  who  “exert  their  superiority  by  manipulating  language”  (124). 
        Barlow and Krentz also describe the  romance  heroine’s  way  with  words:  “In  modern 
        stories  heroines  continue  to  charm,  provoke,  and  challenge  their  lovers  with  their 
        conversation” (23). Barlow and Krentz also remark that “[p]rovocative, confrontational 
        dialogue has been the hallmark of the adversarial relationship that exists between the two 
        major characters ever since the earliest days of romance narrative” (22). 
           Barlow and Krentz discuss further the manner of dialogue between hero and heroine 
        and they emphasize that 
         
             [t]he reader knows that in the conflict between hero and heroine the heroine 
             will  never  have  to  pull  her  punches.  She  won’t  have  to  worry  ‒  as  many 
                            21 
         
             modern women do in their everyday lives ‒ about being too assertive, too 
             aggressive, too verbally direct because this hero is as strong as she is. He is a 
             worthy opponent, a mythic beast who is her heroic complement. (19) 
              
        The reader knows this because of the formulaic nature of the popular romance narratives. 
        The  story  is  always  already  known  (see  e.g.  Modleski).  The  reader  can  enjoy  the 
        “confrontational dialogue” since she or he knows that the hero of the romance is equal to 
        the heroine.  
           An important part of romance literature is idealization, which can be seen in the way 
        in  which  romances  contain  “fantasies  of  fulfilling  relationships”  and  the  “desire  for 
        ‘another’ ([who is] taller, richer, braver, more experienced than ourselves)” (Pearce and 
        Stacey,  13).  Cawelti  discusses  the  latter  type  of  idealization  and  claims  that  “[t]he 
        protagonists of formulaic literature are typically better or more fortunate in some ways 
        than  ourselves”  (18).  He  continues  that  “[t]hey  are  heroes  who  have  the  strength  and 
        courage to overcome great dangers, lovers who find perfectly suited partners, inquirers of 
        exceptional  brilliance  who  discover  hidden  truths,  or  good,  sympathetic  people  whose 
        difficulties  are  resolved  by  some  superior  figure”  (Cawelti  18).  The  protagonists  in 
        romance narratives are not only better when it comes to finding a perfect match but they 
        are also physically very attractive: just as the heroine is extremely beautiful, the hero has 
        an unexceptionally masculine physique. As Radway claims, “[t]he hero of the romantic 
        fantasy is always characterized by spectacular masculinity” and that “[a]lmost everything 
        in  him  is  hard,  angular  and  dark”  (128).  Nevertheless,  she  also  indicates  that  “the 
        terrorizing effect of [the hero’s] exemplary masculinity is always tempered by the presence 
        of a small feature that introduces an important element of softness into the overall picture” 
        (128). Radway gives examples such as “wide, melting Oriental eyes” or “’generous lips’ 
                            22 
         
        which  have  a  ‘sensual  curve  to  them’”  that  might  soften  the  hero’s  otherwise  harsh 
        appearance (128). 
           According  to  Cawelti,  what  differentiates  the  individual  work  of  any  quality  or 
        interest  from  other  formulaic  novels,  is  that  it  “must  have  some  unique  or  special 
        characteristics of its own” (10). In order to have these characteristics in the novel, the 
        writer must have abilities to make them. Cawelti claims that there are “at least two special 
        artistic skills that all good formulaic writers seem to possess to some degree: the ability to 
        give new vitality to stereotypes and the capacity to invent new touches of plot or setting 
        that are still within formulaic limits” (10-11). Cawelti mentions two ways in which the 
        stereotypes can be vitalized: the first one is “the stereotypical character who also embodies 
        qualities that seem contrary to the stereotypical traits”, and the second is “the addition of 
        significant touches of human complexity or frailty to a stereotypical figure” (11−12). 
           Helen Hughes describes the change in the nature of the typical hero as follows: 
         
             The ‘manly’ hero of the adventure stories of the 1890s ‒ a young and ingenious 
             boy or man of action with few social graces ‒ gave place, after 1926 […] in the 
             work of  Heyer  and  her  followers,  to  the  man  of  the  world  who  hides  his 
             sensitivity  under  a  cynical,  even  brutal,  exterior.  Heroines  changed  less  in 
             character, but their function ‒ of challenging the rules of society, in particular 
             the  gender  roles  allotted  to  men  and  women  ‒  became  more  important. 
             Cunning  and  love  of  power,  at  first  the  property  of  the  villain,  became 
             associated with the heroes of later romances. (17) 
         
        Hughes associates this change “with a change of perspective in which the hero moved from 
        object of identification to desirable other” (17). The focus of the narratives changed from 
                            23 
         
        the hero to the heroine, but, despite Hughes’ claim, the readers still identify with the hero 
        as well. As Kinsale claims, “it is myopic to believe that just because the reader is female 
        she is confined to the heroine’s character as the target of authentic reader identification” 
        (32). Krentz follows on the same lines as she claims that “[s]ometimes the reader identifies 
        with  the  heroine;  sometimes  […]  the  heroine  functions  simply  as  a  placeholder,  and 
        sometimes the reader identifies with the hero” (7). 
           Barlow and Krentz describe the hero as follows: “He is no weakling who will run 
        away or turn to another woman when the conflict between himself and the heroine flares. 
        Instead,  he  will  be  forced  in  the  course  of  the  plot  to  prove  his  commitment  to  the 
        relationship, and, unlike many men in the real world, he will pass this test magnificently” 
        (20). Although Hughes claims that the hero hides his sensitivity, Krentz underlines that 
        “[t]he heroine will not accept the hero completely until she has seen some evidence of her 
        own gentleness  and  compassion  in  him”  (5).  But  before  this  happens,  the  hero  treats 
        women badly: he may use them sexually and does not commit himself to one woman. To 
        use Radway’s words, 
         
             In fact, in these romances, the heroine’s innocence is often contrasted explicitly 
             with the hero’s previous promiscuity, behavior that is made tolerable to both 
             the heroine and the reader because it is always attributed to his lack of love for 
             his  sexual  partners.  His  exclusive  preoccupation  with  them  as  tools  for 
             achieving sexual release is never blamed on his callousness or lack of respect 
             for women, but rather on his virility and his fear of emotional involvement with 
             calculating  women.  This  rationalization  conveniently  transforms  his  sexual 
             promiscuity  from  an  arrogant  proclamation  of  his  adherence  to  the  double 
             standard to a sign representing an absence, that is, the nonpresence of love. 
                            24 
         
             Perversely, it testifies, then, to his inescapable and intense need for the heroine. 
             Once she can provide that love by persuading him to trust her, his promiscuous 
             impulses are curbed. Sexual fidelity in the ideal romance is understood to be 
             the natural partner of “true love.” (130) 
         
        Although the hero is promiscuous before falling in love, romance readers expect him to 
        remain faithful to the heroine after falling in love. The aim of this is to show to the readers 
        and the heroine that he is worthy of the heroine. According to Radway, romance readers 
        expect this, as she remarks that  
         
             [t]hroughout  [the  Smithton  women’s]  discussions  of  particular  books,  they 
             repeatedly insisted that what they remembered and liked most about favorite 
             novels was the skill with which the author described the hero’s recognition of 
             his own deep feelings for the heroine and his realization that he could not live 
             without her. While the women want to feel that the heroine will be protected by 
             the  hero,  they  also  seem  to  want  to  see  her  dependency  balanced  by  its 
             opposite, that is, by the hero’s dependence on her. (81) 
         
        Even though the hero is described as brutal, it is tenderness, compassion and the hero’s 
        dependence  on  the  heroine  that  truly  characterize  the  hero  of  a  romance.  Since,  as 
        Modleski puts it, “[e]ven when he appears most indifferent to her, as he frequently does in 
        Harlequin Romances, we can be sure he will eventually tell her how much the thought of 
        her has obsessed him” (16). 
           In Love Story the protagonists have different ethnic backgrounds. Thus I will discuss 
        ethnicity and intermarriage in the following section. 
                            25 
         
        2.3 Intermarriage in Romance 
         
        In this section I will discuss the role of ethnicity and intercultural relationships in literature. 
        Firstly  I  will  discuss how Italian Americans were viewed by others and by themselves 
        during the decades before Love Story was published. Secondly I will examine the role of 
        names as ethnic markers. Thirdly  I will discuss intercultural relationships portrayed in 
        literature. 
           Not long after Love Story was published, John Ibson wrote an article on “white 
        ethnicity”. He suggests that during the 1960s  
         
             the recognition grew that white ethnicity remained meaningful. Both the past 
             and present experience of white ethnics began to be explored with new rigor 
             and  fresh  questions.  Revealingly,  American  novelists  had  never  stopped 
             writing about white ethnicity, but the sixties did witness increased attention to 
             the topic in fictional works of considerable artistry and appeal. (289) 
               
        Ibson includes in the people who can be classified in the category of white ethnicity “the 
        ‘PIGS’  (Poles,  Italians,  Greeks,  and  Slavs)  [who]  have  cultures  so  incongruent  with 
        America’s dominant culture that they cannot reasonably be expected to adapt” (289). Ibson 
        calls this the “failure of ‘WASPification’” (289). 
           Although Italian immigrants, according to Jennifer Guglielmo, “were in many of the 
        most-critical ways ‘white on arrival’ in the United States: they could become citizens, own 
        property, vote, represent themselves in a court of law, and marry whomever they chose” 
        (126), they were not equal with the whites. In fact, according to Vecoli, Italians were 
        “[c]lassified as ‘black’ labor” and as such they “were the object of loathing by American 
                            26 
         
        union leaders and workers as well as by the upper classes” (51). Vecoli also states that “the 
        nativist movement for immigration restriction made clear to Italian Americans that they 
        were  viewed  as  inferior  and  undesirable”  (53).  Vecoli  continues  that  “[w]hen  federal 
        agents  raided  their  neighborhoods  and  trashed  their  homes,  they  understood  that  the 
        Eighteenth Amendment and the Volsted Act were aimed at their ‘un-American’ lifestyles” 
        (53). Although immigrants from Europe were considered white, they were still considered 
        to be ‘others’ because they had a different way of life. Friedman claims that “[t]he drive to 
        coerce immigrants into assimilating coincided with a desire to expunge the difference and 
        ‘otherness’ of ethnic newcomers, which culminated in the passage of the 1924 Immigrant 
        Act” (181). In other words, it was a difficult time for the Italian Americans to develop an 
        ethnic identity when they were considered to be white and black at the same time and they 
        were pressured to assimilate into the American way of life. 
           According  to  Stefano  Luconi,  “the  descendants  of  the  European  immigrants 
        elaborated a common white self-image in the mid and late 1960s” (5). Fred Gardaphé 
        claims that ‘lumping’ Italian immigrants and Italian Americans with whites, is “a practice 
        that, although pleasing to those who wish to erase the immigrant past and thus pass as 
        whites,  not  only  distorts  the  social  and  political  problems  encountered  by  Italian 
        Americans,  but  also  shadows  the  contributions  they  have  made  to  American  culture” 
        (“Follow”  266).  What  this  means  is  that  although  the  Italian  Americans  began  to  see 
        themselves as white they still encountered problems because of their background. They 
        were still considered as ‘others’. 
           The  Italian  American  image  is  often  linked  with  gangsters.  The  gangster  figure 
        emerged, according to Gardaphé, at “a time when immigration to the United States was at 
        its highest and xenophobia was rampant” (Wiseguys 12). Gardaphé states that “negative 
        portrayals  [of  Italian  immigrants]  appeared  in  the  mainstream  U.S  media  of  the  late 
                            27 
         
        nineteenth and early twentieth centuries” (Wiseguys 12). Gardaphé describes the gangster 
        figure as follows: 
         
              Based on the realities of 1920s and 1930s, crime scenes in films such as 
              Scarface (1932), Little Caesar (1930), and The Public Enemy (1931) moved 
              from  ethnic  ghettos  to  downtown  commercial  centers.  This  enabled  the 
              criminal to resemble more closely those in the rising business class rather 
              than the dark, ethnic foreigners of earlier depictions. Thus, the criminal rose 
              in class and assimilated to mainstream culture just as American urban white 
              ghetto  ethnics  were  trying  to  do  the  same.  Easier  access  to  stylish 
              consumption  through  fancy  dress  and  cars  blurred  the  earlier  lines  that 
              separated the social classes. As street criminals began associating with upper 
              echelons of society, it became harder to tell the gangster from the corporate 
              elite. The central ethnic figure in this first stage of representation, in spite of 
              the  fact  that  other  ethnic  groups  were  involved  in  organized  crime,  is  the 
              Italian ‒ but not just any Italian. 
                The prototype for this gangster is Al Capone. (Wiseguys 12‒13) 
              
        The  Italian  Americans  were  associated  with  the  negative  image  of  gangsters,  and 
        especially Al Capone, before the World War II. During the war, however, the attitude 
        towards Italian Americans became worse. Luconi states that “after the beginning of World 
        War II,  ethnic  intolerance  became  again  a  major  concern  for  Italian  Americans”  (98). 
        According to Luconi, 
         
                            28 
         
             Following Italy’s attack on France, Fortune warned against the presence of a 
             pro-fascist ‘fifth column’ in America that was allegedly made up of individuals 
             who were ready to take the field as ‘enemy soldiers within our borders’ in case 
             of the outbreak of a war between Italy and the United States. This magazine 
             also  pointed  to  Philadelphia’s  Italian-language  weekly  L’Osservatore  as  an 
             example  of  Mussolini’s  mouthpieces  in  the  country.  In  addition,  Collier’s 
             stressed  the  spread  of  growing  hostility  against  Italian  Americans  and 
             discrimination  in  employment.  This  attitude  affected  the  hiring  not  only  of 
             unnaturalized  Italians  but  also  of  American-born  laborers  who  were 
             identifiable as of Italian ancestry. (98‒9) 
              
        Italian Americans were not only thought of as ‘others,’ but they were a possible enemy at 
        war  as  well.  Some  of  them  were  not  necessarily  identifiable  as  Italian  Americans  by 
        anything other than their name, because they had been born and raised in the United States. 
        Since Italian ancestry was not necessarily a visible feature in a person, names became 
        important. According to Luconi,  
         
             [i]n April 1941, Harol B. Hoskins, a State Department investigator reported 
             ‘increasing restrictions, even in non-defense industries, on the employment of 
             foreign  born  citizens  by  virtue  of  their  foreign-born  names.’  He  also 
             highlighted  ‘a  smoldering  suspicion  on  the  part  of  American-born  citizens 
             against  all  citizens  with  foreign-born  names,  particularly  those  of  German, 
             Italian, or Slavic origin.’ (99) 
         
                            29 
         
        Thus names were an important aspect in recognizing a person’s ethnicity but not only to 
        those who considered themselves as WASPs. Foreign-born names were an important factor 
        for the people who had them as well. As Werner Sollors quotes the view of Daniel Bell, 
        “[e]thnicity provides a tangible set of common identifications − in language, food, music, 
        names − when other social roles become more abstract and impersonal” (“Theory” 263). 
           Since ethnicity, as quoted above, translates to common identifications, it is a quality 
        that some have as opposed to others. It is this otherness that leads the ‘Yankees’ to wonder: 
        “’Are we ethnic?’−as the New Yorker put it in a cartoon of 1972 […] depicting a white 
        middle-class family in an elegant dining room” (Sollors, Beyond 24). According to Sollors 
        it “is the question Yankees or WASPs have had to ask themselves many times since then, 
        and without getting just one universally accepted answer” (Beyond 24). Sollors highlights 
        that although 
         
             [i]t  may be absurd, […] to except white Anglo-Saxon Protestant Americans 
             from the category of ethnicity […] and yet it is a widespread practice to define 
             ethnicity as otherness. The contrastive terminology of ethnicity thus reveals a 
             point of view which changes according to the speaker who uses it: for example, 
             for some Americans eating turkey and reading Hawthorne appear to be more 
             “ethnic” than eating lasagna and reading Puzo. (Beyond 25) 
         
        Although ethnicity is in many ways a matter of point of view, it seems to possess a threat 
        to people since it is not easy to determine who is ethnic and who is not. Those boundaries 
        between the familiar and the other are easily broken and fused. Love relationships between 
        people with different ethnic backgrounds disrupt the boundaries between ethnic groups and 
        cause  resentment  in  some  people.  According  to  Sollors,  “[t]he  code  phrase  ‘second 
                                                                     30 
                     
                    generation’ also evokes the animosities that ‘melting pot’ and ‘intermarriage’ sometimes 
                    receive  as  threats  to  ‘ethnic  purity’  and  human  identity  over  more  than  one  lifetime” 
                    (Beyond 224). Fear often causes animosities and in Sollors’s view “[t]he fear that lurks 
                    behind the aggressive response to the famous question ‘But would you like your daughter 
                    to marry one?’ is the fear of ‘losing’ the children to a further progeny that bears only a 
                    little resemblance to the addressee of the question” (Beyond 224). Janet Dean claims that 
                    “Lévi-Strauss remarks that incest ‘combines in some countries with its direct opposite, 
                    inter-racial  sexual  relations…as  the  two  most  powerful  inducements  to  horror  and 
                    collective vengeance’” (47). 
                          The fear of ‘losing’ the children because they look different from you can be difficult 
                    to understand today, but for purists it was considered a real threat. Sollors elaborates on to 
                    what the threat of ‘second generation’ led to: 
                     
                                 Unable to recognize themselves in their necessarily mixed  progeny, purists 
                                 have preferred to develop elaborate fictions of an ‘inky curse’ […] upon their 
                                 descendants.  The  purists’  own  unwillingness  to  accept  the  mixed  after-
                                 generations as theirs is seen as the ‘loss’ of the children, and the projection of 
                                 this  self-constructed  loss  upon  the  descendants  of  mixed  marriages  is  the 
                                 cultural   belief‒widespread  in  nineteenth-  and  early-twentieth-century 
                                 America‒that  ‘mixed  bloods,’  ‘mulattoes,’  and  ‘half-breeds’  were  sterile. 
                                 (Beyond 224) 
                     
                    What Sollors emphasizes is that the love relationships between people with different ethnic 
                    backgrounds have been thought to disrupt the natural order of things. Romances with their 
                    formula  affirm  the  patriarchal  order  which  is  similarly  thought  to  be  disrupted  by 
                            31 
         
        interracial  relationships.  According  to  Sollors,  “[m]ixed  marriages  of  all  sorts,  and 
        especially marital unions between whites and Indians or whites and Afro-Americans, often 
        appeared dangerous in American literature, the offspring of such unions doomed” (Beyond 
        224). Thus in romances a mixed marriage is uncommon since it implies a tragedy instead 
        of  a  happy  ending.  Sollors  continues  that  “[t]he  mulatto  and  half-breed  themes  were 
        inevitably tragic or horrifying” (Beyond 224). Janet Dean discusses the role of race in J. F. 
        Cooper’s The Last of the Mohicans, a novel that provides an example of a tragic mixed 
        race  relationship.  In  The  Last  of  the  Mohicans,  Cora,  one  of  the  two  main  female 
        characters, has a “legacy of mixed blood” (47). Her potential romance with the Mohican 
        Uncas “ends in a scene of bloody interracial violence; their ‘marriage’ can take place only 
        in death” (Dean 47). Dean claims that 
         
             Cora becomes a spectacle of female victimization as she succumbs to the knife 
             of  one  of  Magua’s  men  in  dramatic  cliff-top  struggle.  Still,  because  she 
             exhibits an agency denied her as a female and a non-white, because her body 
             presents so profound a challenge to the white patriarchal scopic regime, Cora’s 
             disruptive  presence  must  be  brought  under  control  not  by  making  her  a 
             spectacle for the white male gaze, but by removing her from the visual field 
             altogether. (64) 
         
        Dean concludes that when “[d]ead, Cora ceases to be a threat to the boundaries drawn 
        between races and cultures” (64). She also indicates that Cora’s “death also clears the way 
        for Munro’s surviving child to marry Heyward, thus insuring the racial integrity of his 
        bloodline” (64). In other words, ethnic mixing appears as dangerous and will inevitably 
        lead to a tragic end. 
                            32 
         
           Pearce  writes  about  romances  and  race  that  “the  mass-market  end  of  popular 
        romance […] has remained resolutely silent on issues of homosexuality and race” (142). 
        She nevertheless indicates that  
         
             it should be noted that although all the heroes and heroines ultimately ‘prove 
             themselves’ to be white, Mills & Boon/Harlequin have enjoyed a long tradition 
             of exotic ‘dark-skinned’ male lovers who might at first appear to be black or 
             mixed-race but who ultimately turn out to be no ‘blacker’ than Mediterranean 
             (for example, the hero of the infamous best-seller The Sheik (1919), who is 
             ultimately revealed to be not an Arab but half-Scottish and half-Spanish). (143, 
             emphasis original) 
              
        This idea of a hero that proves himself to be white continues the tradition of obscured 
        identities in romance literature. In the case of The Sheik and other ‘dark-skinned’ lovers, it 
        also brings an element of exotic to the narrative. This long tradition of exotic lovers is in 
        Amira  Jarmakani’s  view  “a  relatively  small  but  nevertheless  significant  subgenre  of 
        romance  novels”  (895).  The  qualifying  element  for  this  subgenre  is  that  there  is  “a 
        seemingly unlikely object of erotic attachment, a sheikh, sultan, or desert prince hero who 
        almost always couples with a white western woman” (Jarmakani 895). Regardless of the 
        existence  of  this  subgenre,  also  Jarmakani  comments  on  the  “lack  of  ‘minorities’  in 
        romance and, in particular, of multiracial romances” (896). 
           While ethnicity is not portrayed in many romances, in immigrant fiction it plays a 
        major role. Since immigrant fiction contains romance elements in it, thus, I will discuss it 
        here. Natalie Friedman writes in her article “Marriage and the Immigrant Narrative” that 
        ”[t]he desire for the ‘American Dream’ is not the province of only men; however women 
                            33 
         
        have been systematically shut out of that Dream, even in their own narratives, through 
        marriage” (177). The female characters become shut out “because of the belief that a man 
        is the head of the household” (Friedman, 177). According to “Time [Magazine], [freedom 
        for women is a] release from patriarchal family constraints, such that the free choice of 
        love  object  is  the  pure  image  of  freedom  itself”  (Friedman,  177).  This  freedom  is, 
        according to Friedman, a fantasy that the United States offers (177). The reality for the 
        immigrant women is actually “quite the opposite of the American fantasy” as a “marriage 
        in America can be just as patriarchal an institution as it was in the homeland” (Friedman, 
        177). Friedman argues that “marriage is a form of assimilation that does not always work 
        in the woman’s favor” (177). 
           Friedman claims that “[m]arriage – especially if it is exogamous – is not a means to 
        assimilate  and  achieve;  rather,  it  becomes  a  metaphor  for  the  invisibility  of  certain 
        immigrants, namely women, who effectively ‘disappear’ behind their husbands, especially 
        in cultures that cling to traditional social and sexual hierarchies” (177). Friedman continues 
        that “[i]n women’s immigrant fiction, then, female characters sometimes become invisible 
        because  of  the  belief  that  a  man  is  the  head  of  the  house-hold.  Conversely,  in  most 
        masculine immigrant fictions women characters often disappear behind the narrative of the 
        man’s ultimate success” (177). Since marriage is a way to shut out women of the American 
        Dream, Friedman “predicts a narrative trend […] in which the drive to Americanize comes 
        at the cost of romantic happiness” (177). 
           It is a marriage to an American that should Americanize the immigrant woman and 
        thus give her the American Dream but instead she either disappears behind her successful 
        husband or she becomes invisible as the husband decides for her. These both scenarios 
        have one thing in common: the immigrant woman stays out of sight. Friedman provides an 
        alternative to marriage: work that, according to her, “might be a far more important social 
                            34 
         
        ritual”  than  marriage  and  as  such  an  “option  for  the  immigrant  woman’s  survival  in 
        America”  (Friedman,  176).  In  other  words,  the  immigrant  woman’s  means  to  attain 
        visibility is to work and thus be involved in the public sphere. 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
                            35 
         
        3. Analysing Love Story 
         
        In  my  analysis  of  Love  Story  I  will  concentrate  on  two  topics:  its  use  of  romance 
        conventions and the portrayal of ethnicity in the novel. The first topic is discussed in two 
        sections. First I will discuss the elements that are typical for romance genre in general in. 
        Then I will analyse Love Story based on Radway’s functions in order to show that the 
        novel follows the formula for the ideal popular romance. The second topic I will address in 
        the  third  section  in  which  I  will  examine  the  role  of  the  intercultural  relationship  as 
        represented in the novel. 
         
         
        3.1 Origins of Love Story 
         
        Love Story is quite different from such modern romances in which the stories are mostly 
        about women falling in love and getting married in the end. Yet these romances are only a 
        part of a very varied genre and do not portray all of its characteristics. Romance literature 
        has changed, but as I pointed out in the section 2.1, one of the defining aspects of the genre 
        is that the narratives keep referring back to previous texts, repeating and rewriting them. 
        On the basis of my discussion of the history of the genre, in this chapter I will show that 
        Love Story has elements that stem from older romances. 
           I listed in the chapter 2.1 three romance conventions that McDermott claims to have 
        originated from Odyssey. Two of them can be found in Love Story. Firstly, Love Story is 
        the private story of Oliver and Jennifer’s “domestic and adventurous life”. Although in 
        Love  Story  it  is  the  relationship  and  its  development  which  is  Oliver  and  Jennifer’s 
        adventure. Secondly, Love Story introduces love and sexuality. Modern romances usually 
                            36 
         
        end in the marriage of the hero and heroine, but the love presented in earlier romances was 
        between married couples. In Love Story, the love matures during the novel. At first Oliver 
        and Jennifer meet and fall in love and eventually marry, but the reader learns that their love 
        story continues after the marriage. The third convention is the happy ending.  
           The ending for the romance between the protagonists is not a happy one in Love 
        Story. The character Jennifer dies in the end which leaves Oliver heartbroken and alone. 
        Although the ending is sad, it is not a hopeless one. As John G. Cawelti writes: “[t]hough 
        the usual outcome is a permanently happy marriage, more sophisticated types of love story 
        sometimes end in the death of one or both the lovers, but always in such a way as to 
        suggest that the love relation has been of lasting and permanent impact” (41-42). I will 
        show that this is the case in Love Story. 
           Love Story’s reader feels that the love between Jennifer and Oliver still exists in 
        Oliver’s heart and memories, as Oliver relives their story in the novel:  
         
             I began to think about God […] Like when I woke up in the morning and Jenny 
             was there. Still there. I’m sorry, embarrassed even, but I hoped there was God I 
             could say thank you to. Thank you for letting me wake up and see Jennifer. 
             (108) 
         
        From the Love Story’s first sentence “What can I say about a 25-year-old girl who died?” 
        (11)  the  reader  learns  that  even  after  Jennifer’s  death,  Oliver  still  reflects  on  their 
        relationship. The novel continues by Oliver wondering the order of things dear to Jennifer. 
        She is dead but Oliver still thinks about whether she loved Bach more than him. The novel 
        consists of Oliver’s memories as he is telling their love story. Thus the ending of the novel 
        with Jennifer’s death brings the reader back to the beginning. Although Jennifer dies in the 
                            37 
         
        end, to quote Cawelti, “[i]t is not the inability of love to triumph over obstacles that brings 
        about the death of Jenny, but a biological accident” as she dies of leukaemia (41). Their 
        love triumphs over obstacles, but it cannot keep Jennifer alive. 
           Another reason for the untraditional ending of the romance may be, as Elizabeth 
        Long writes of best sellers from the years 1969 to 1975, that “[h]appy endings become less 
        common indicating  that  the  familiar  formulaic  resolutions  may  have  lost  plausibility” 
        (119). Thus the ending of Love Story is not necessarily a flaw in the story’s characteristics 
        of romance but an indication of the time it was written in and the general atmosphere of the 
        time period’s popular literature. 
           Though Jennifer dies at the end of the novel, the ending is not completely hopeless. 
        The tragic impact of the death is decreased since the love between Oliver and his father is 
        reaffirmed by showing their reconnection. This is seen in the novel when Oliver’s father 
        arrives at the hospital after Jennifer has died: 
         
               “Oliver,” said my father urgently, “I want to help.” 
               “Jenny’s dead,” I told him. 
               “I’m sorry,” he said in a stunned whisper. 
               Not knowing why, I repeated what I had long ago learned from the beautiful 
             girl now dead. 
               “Love means not ever having to say you’re sorry.” 
               And then I did what I had never done in his presence, much less in his arms. I 
             cried. (127) 
              
        In other words, Jennifer’s death brings the father and son closer than they have ever been, 
        and it is a new beginning for their relationship. 
                            38 
         
           Fuchs has, on the other hand, pointed out different characteristics than McDermott. 
        The first characteristic she draws attention to is hidden identities that are later revealed. 
        Oliver’s  identity  in  the  beginning  of  the  novel  is  partly  occluded  since  he  is  at  the 
        university and the university is no longer a place intended for the wealthy alone. He meets 
        people with different backgrounds in a more equal setting. In the novel when Oliver meets 
        Jennifer he tries to hide his identity himself by not telling his whole name to her: 
         
               “My name is Oliver,” I said. 
               “First or last?” she asked. 
               “First,”  I  answered,  and  then  confessed  that  my  entire  name  was  Oliver 
             Barrett. (I mean that’s most of it.) (13) 
         
        He is reluctant to tell his surname, which is seen in the way the narrator describes it as a 
        ‘confession.’ As if Oliver were revealing a sin, and yet he still withholds the significant 
        numeral. Thus he withholds the ‘sin’ of being the fourth Oliver Barrett instead of the first. 
        This  emphasizes  not  only  Oliver’s  ambition  to  be  number  one,  but  also  his  strained 
        relationship with his father. He denies his background and the long tradition of his family 
        as if trying to escape the role planned for him. Oliver subsequently reveals his identity 
        when Jennifer is not impressed by him: 
         
               “Hey, don’t you know who I am?” 
               “Yeah,”  she  answered  with  kind  of  disdain.  “You’re  the  guy  that  owns 
             Barrett Hall.” 
               She didn’t know who I was. 
                            39 
         
               “I don’t own Barrett Hall,” I quibbled. “My great-grandfather happened to 
             give it to Harvard.” (14) 
         
        While Oliver despises his father and his family, at the same time he expects respect and 
        admiration  from  others  because  of  his  family  background.  Oliver  is  used  to  receiving 
        respect, and when Jennifer treats him like anybody he uses his family name to show that he 
        deserves  respect.  He  is  at  the  same  time  trying  to  hide  his  background  and  expecting 
        admiration  because  of  it.  He  wants  to  escape  the  demands  of  his  family  tradition  but 
        remains a believer in the system and its values.  
           The protagonists’ identities are occluded at first since they are at the university where 
        their different backgrounds do not stand out as much as they would in other circumstances. 
        As Jennifer says in the novel:  
         
             “Harvard is like Santa’s Christmas bag. You can stuff any crazy kind of toy 
             into  it.  But  when  the  holiday’s  over,  they  shake  you  out…”  She  hesitated. 
             “…and you gotta go back where you belong.” (46) 
         
        Jennifer’s comment shows that she understands that they have different social statuses but 
        she still does not know the extent of the difference. The true identities are revealed when 
        Oliver and Jennifer meet each other’s parents. Jennifer sees how wealthy Oliver’s family 
        really is when they are driving to the Barrett house: 
         
             Anyway, I drove slowly once we were on Barrett soil. It’s at least a half mile in 
             from Groton Street to Dover House proper. En route you pass other…well, 
             buildings. I guess it’s fairly impressive when you see it for the first time. 
                            40 
         
               “Holy shit!” Jenny said. 
               “What’s the matter, Jen?” 
               “Pull over, Oliver. No kidding. Stop the car.” 
             I stopped the car. She was clutching. 
               Hey, I didn’t think it would be like this.” 
               “Like what?” 
               “Like this rich. I mean, I bet you have serfs living here.” (49-50; emphasis 
             original) 
         
        Jennifer’s reaction highlights the protagonists’ class difference. She expected the Barrett 
        family to be wealthy but is quite intimidated with the reality. Jennifer’s comment on serfs 
        suggests that the difference is such that it is as if she had been taken to another time. It also 
        insinuates that the Barretts are the equivalent of the mean landowner profiting from the 
        work of his slaves. 
           The  contrast  between  these  two  backgrounds  is  further  emphasized  when  it  is 
        Oliver’s turn to meet Jennifer’s father. Oliver has a reaction similar to hers when he sees 
        what a tight knit community it is where Jennifer grew up: 
         
             Jenny lived on a street called Hamilton Avenue, a long line of wooden houses 
             with many children in front of them, and a few scraggly trees. Merely driving 
             down it, looking for a parking space, I felt like in another country. To begin 
             with there were so many people. Besides the children playing, there were entire 
             families  sitting  on  their  porches  with  apparently  nothing  better  to  do  this 
             Sunday afternoon than to watch me park my MG. (65) 
         
                            41 
         
        Oliver’s reaction reveals that he had not anticipated Jennifer’s neighbourhood to be so 
        involved in each other’s lives. He feels the neighbourhood watching him and especially his 
        car, which is an English sport car. Most likely such cars are rarely seen there. According to 
        the narrative, Oliver feels like he is in another country which highlights the cultural clash.  
           The protagonists of Love Story are also idealized, which is another characteristic that 
        Fuchs mentions. Whereas Oliver is wealthy, good-looking, athletic, confident and smart, 
        Jennifer, although she is poor, is a talented musician, witty, smart and beautiful. The third 
        convention Fuchs points out concerns the marvels and monsters of Classic romances. In 
        Love Story these are the power of Oliver and Jennifer’s love and Jennifer’s leukaemia. 
        Their tasks and tests in the novel are overcoming the obstacles that their relationship faces 
        and those obstacles:  Oliver’s  parents’  disapproval  of  their  marriage,  the  infertility  and 
        struggling with money. Much like the medieval romances that are older texts rewritten in 
        French, Love Story is also transformed to fit in the different time and place. Thus Love 
        Story does not have the kind of monsters found in Classical romances. The romance has 
        transformed in a new context. As Radford describes the change: 
         
             the  ‘magic’  which  in  earlier  romances  rescues  the  hero  from  false  Grails 
             becomes in Jane Eyre a supernatural voice which unites her with her ‘true’ 
             destiny […] that magical/supernatural/Providential force is in today’s romance 
             represented as coming from within: as the magic and omnipotent power of 
             sexual desire. (10; emphasis original) 
         
           In medieval romances the hero’s experience of love was emphasized. Similarly in 
        Love Story it is the hero’s experience of love that the reader learns. Love Story is the story 
        of Oliver Barrett IV, who is a modern version of a knight/an aristocratic male. He comes 
                            42 
         
        from a family of wealth that has been passed on and increased through generations. The 
        Barretts  have a long tradition of athleticism and studying in Harvard, one of the most 
        respected universities in the United States of America. In Love Story this is highlighted by 
        Jennifer’s reaction when she learns the Barrett family tree from portraits: 
         
             Jenny was taken aback by some of the portraits we passed. Not just that some 
             were by John Singer Sargent (notably Oliver Barrett II, sometimes displayed in 
             the Boston Museum), but the new realization that not all of my forebears were 
             named Barrett. There had been solid Barrett women who had mated well and 
             bred  such  creatures  as  Barrett  Winthrop,  Richard  Barrett  Sewall  and  even 
             Abbott  Lawrence  Lyman,  who  had  the  temerity  to  go  through  life  (and 
             Harvard, its implicit analogue), becoming a prize-winning chemist, without so 
             much as a Barrett in his middle name! 
             […] 
               At  the  end  of  the  long  row  of  portraits,  and  just  before  one  turns  in  the 
             library, stands a glass case. In the case are trophies. Athletic trophies. 
               “They’re gorgeous,” Jenny said. “I’ve never seen ones that look like real gold 
             and silver.” 
               “They are.” (50-51; emphasis original) 
         
        The family’s wealth and long traditions are appreciated by Oliver’s parents as they have 
        the portraits of their ancestors hanging on the wall and the trophies on the show. Oliver has 
        grown up with the constant reminder of the achievements of his relatives. Because of the 
        tradition Oliver’s parents expect him to succeed in his studies and in life so that he will 
        continue the Barrett way of life: earning money and respect.  
                            43 
         
           Although the hero’s experience of love was stressed in medieval romances, so was 
        the women’s perspective. Hansson mentions that the heroine of medieval romances had 
        power: the power to seduce men (83). She was also a threat to male bonding and the social 
        order (Hansson 84). In Love Story, Jennifer is seen as threat by Oliver’s father. What he 
        sees is not a music student, but a poor woman with ethnic background taking advantage of 
        his WASP son. Jennifer is powerful, getting the womanizer Oliver feel insecure: 
         
             After that, she was pretty quiet. Could we have run out of conversation so 
             quickly? Had I turned her off by not being related to the poet? What? She 
             simply sat there, semi-smiling at me. For something to do, I checked out her 
             notebooks. (14) 
              
        Oliver does not know what to do when Jennifer just sits silently. He needs to keep himself 
        busy by checking her notebooks. He is trying to take control of the situation, but he fails 
        and gets frustrated: 
         
               “Jenny, if you’re so convinced that I’m a loser, why did you bulldoze me into 
             buying you coffee?” 
               She looked me straight in the eye and smiled. 
               “I like your body,” she said. (14) 
              
        As Jennifer answers, she reveals how she is in control of the situation by looking Oliver 
        straight in the eye and boldly commenting her motives to be purely physical attraction. 
           Although Love Story does not have all the conventional romance elements, it does 
        have many of the characteristics that have their origins in older romances. Of the romance 
                            44 
         
        conventions I have discussed Love Story contains all but one: the happy ending. As I have 
        suggested, it is not a flaw in the novel’s generic conventions but an indication of the time it 
        was written in and as a result the novel still provides a sentiment of everlasting love.  
         
         
        3.2 The Formula for Love Story 
         
        Although Love Story has many of the romance elements which stem from older romances, 
        it is a popular romance novel published in 1970. Thus, in this section, I will analyse Love 
        Story based on the formula for more modern popular romance. As I suggested in section 
        2.2, there are two sides to a formula: a plot type and “a conventional way of treating some 
        specific thing or person” (Cawelti 5). In this section I will examine the plot of Love Story 
        and show that it follows the formula of popular romances. I will also analyse the hero and 
        heroine of Love Story in order to show that they fit in the latter usage of the formula. 
           The typical formula for the romance narrative is that a boy and a girl meet, they fall 
        in  love,  the  course  of  their  relationship  encounters  obstacles  but  the  couple  eventually 
        solves the problems, marry, and the narrative ends with the impression that they will live 
        happily ever after. Love Story breaks the illusion of a happily ending story right at the 
        beginning with its very first sentence. The reader discovers right from the beginning that 
        the heroine is dead. Nevertheless, Love Story has some elements of the larger plot type 
        called  romance:  Oliver  and  Jennifer  meet,  there  are  obstacles  on  the  course  of  their 
        relationship but the couple eventually solves their issues and marries. The obstacles that 
        Jennifer and Oliver have in the path of their relationship are both social and psychological 
        which is what most romantic formulas centre on (Cawelti 42). Jennifer’s and Oliver’s 
        major obstacle is that Jennifer is a poor girl who falls in love with a rich man. It is “a 
                            45 
         
        favourite formulaic plot […] which might be called the Cinderella formula” (Cawelti 42). 
        The most recognizable difference is that the story of Jennifer and Oliver does not end here. 
        They continue to face obstacles but get through them until Jennifer dies of leukaemia. 
           Jones’s view on the romance plot differs from Cawelti’s, but as she stated it is “still 
        used by older writers” (198). Thus it is not a plot summary that describes all romances but 
        some of them. Love Story differs significantly from Jones’s description: The hero and 
        heroine of Love Story are also equal in age, the heroine is not a virgin, the hero is hinted to 
        being  ‘sexually  expert’  but  he  is  not  domineering  nor  does  he  “take[…]  the  reins 
        erotically” (Jones 198). In Love Story it is the heroine who is in control of the situation 
        even when matters become erotic: 
         
               “Jenny, for Christ’s sake, how can I read John Stuart Mill when every single 
             second I’m dying to make love to you?” 
               She screwed up her brow and frowned. 
               “Oh, Oliver, wouldja please?” 
               I was crouching by her chair. She looked back into her book. 
               “Jenny‒” 
               She closed her book softly, put it down, then placed her hands on the sides of 
             my neck. 
               “Oliver‒wouldja please.” 
               It all happened at once. Everything. (40) 
         
        Jennifer is not the typical virgin heroine who fights of the hero until they are married. 
        Jones’s description is accurate, but only of certain types of romance. She does not take into 
        consideration in her summary the changeability of romance. As Stephanie Burley claims: 
                            46 
         
         
             Trends  in  popular  romance  signal  a  move  towards  queerer  economies  of 
             representation, especially with respect to the “typical” hero. The replacement 
             of  1970s-style  bodice-rippers  with  virginal  men  and  sexually  experienced 
             women  (a  replacement  that  occurred  in  response  to  readers’  preferences) 
             suggests a taste for more fluid erotic affiliations in women’s popular culture. 
             (146) 
         
        Although Love Story was published in 1970 and the 1970s still had those ‘bodice-rippers,’ 
        the popularity of Love Story shows that the readers of romance were already ready for 
        change: the change that transforms not only the typical hero but also the typical heroine. 
        The 1970s is a time when women’s roles were changing as women were fighting for 
        equality and it is also seen as a time for women’s sexual liberation. This change is reflected 
        in  1970s to 1980s romance literature, as “in a last neat twist of romance conventions, 
        Judith Krantz even makes her latest heroine the initiator of sexual action, possessing the 
        secret knowledge of arousing desire, formerly the prerogative of the experienced male” 
        (Fowler 105). 
           As Jones’s summary of a romance plot is quite rigid I shall emphasize Radway’s 
        functions in analysing Love Story. Radway listed functions that should be found in an ideal 
        romance (134). Since, as discussed earlier, one does not find all the conventional elements 
        of romance in Love Story, it is not surprising that it does not include all of Radway’s 13 
        functions in its storyline. Furthermore, the functions in the list cannot be found in Love 
        Story as such, since the novels read by the Smithton women are mainly written from the 
        female perspective. In contrast, Love Story is written from the hero’s perspective, and its 
        hero and heroine are not a typical romance couple. In fact, their roles are often reversed: as 
                            47 
         
        I pointed earlier, it is often the heroine of Love Story who is in control, not the hero and in 
        their  first  meeting  the  heroine  is  indifferent  towards  the  hero.  As  Modleski  claims: 
        “typically in the first meeting between hero and heroine, the man’s indifference, contempt, 
        or amusement is emphasized (40), not the heroine’s as is the case in Love Story. Hence it 
        has been necessary for me to modify the functions, so that some of the events are seen 
        from the hero’s point of view.  
           According to Radway, the first function in the ideal romance is that the heroine is 
        removed from her familiar setting and she is feeling a loss (134−135). Love Story begins 
        with Oliver, the hero, telling the reader of Jennifer’s, the heroine’s, death. Although one 
        could argue that death is the ultimate removal from the familiar, it is not Jennifer in Love 
        Story who is feeling the loss, but the hero: 
         
             What can you say about a twenty-five-year-old girl who died? 
               That she was beautiful. And brilliant. That she loved Mozart and Bach. And 
             the Beatles. And me. (11) 
              
        In Love Story it is not the heroine who is feeling the loss in the beginning, and thus it will 
        not be the heroine’s transformation that the narrative describes. Rather, it focuses on the 
        hero’s  transformation  from  an  insecure  adolescent,  who  is  in  a  way  isolated  from  his 
        parents: Oliver feels distant to both his mother and father and is slightly intimidated by the 
        latter. He is unsure of his own identity since he feels that he is mere a copy of his father, 
        similar but not as good. As the novel puts it, Oliver has “grown up with notion that [he] 
        always had to be number one” (11). Yet Oliver feels second best, because his mother loves 
        his father more than her son. When Oliver brings Jennifer to see his parents, the reader 
        finds out that Oliver’s relationship with his mother is a complicated one. When Oliver and 
                            48 
         
        his father debate and the latter is triumphant, Oliver’s thoughts are described as follows: 
        “My mother smiled at this, apparently satisfied that her Oliver had taken that set” (55; 
        emphasis original). 
           The second function is that the hero reacts antagonistically to an aristocratic male. 
        There is no aristocratic male in Love Story, but there is a wealthy and powerful bourgeois 
        man, Oliver’s father, who can be seen as the representative of the aristocratic male. Oliver 
        reacts to his father defiantly when he asks Oliver to wait a while before marrying Jennifer: 
         
               “Define ‘while,’ please.” 
               “Finish law school. If this is real, it can stand the test of time.” 
               “It is real, but why in hell should I subject it to some arbitrary test?” My 
             implication was clear I think. I was standing up to him. To his arbitrariness. To 
             his compulsion to dominate and control my life. 
               “Oliver.” He began a new round. “You’re a minor –“ 
               “A minor what?” I was losing my temper, goddammit. 
               “You are not yet twenty-one. Not legally an adult.” 
               “Screw the legal nitpicking, dammit!” (62; emphasis original) 
         
        The  conversation  between  Oliver  and  his  father  continues  to  the  next  function:  The 
        aristocratic male responds ambiguously to the hero. Oliver’s father says to him “in a biting 
        whisper: ‘Marry her now, and I will not give you the time of day’” (62). With this remark 
        Oliver’s father isolates Oliver from his family. While earlier Oliver only felt distant from 
        his parents, now he also has to provide for himself. 
           The fourth function cannot be found in Love Story. The hero never interprets the 
        heroine’s behaviour as evidence of a purely sexual interest in him or if he does, he is not 
                            49 
         
        unhappy about this. In the beginning of the novel, Jennifer tells Oliver that she went for 
        coffee with him because she liked his body (14). Nevertheless, even this does not lead 
        Oliver to worry over whether Jennifer’s interest in him is purely sexual. If Jennifer feels 
        that Oliver’s interest to her is only sexual, it is not told in the text. Jennifer appears to be 
        sure of herself and in control of the situation, unlike Oliver. 
           The fifth function is that the hero responds to the heroine’s behaviour with anger or 
        coldness. In Love Story, Oliver responds to Jennifer’s behaviour by showing with emotions 
        of both anger and coldness. Jennifer is upset because Oliver no longer has any contact with 
        his family so when Oliver’s parents invite them over to celebrate the birthday of Oliver’s 
        father Jennifer replies to the invitation. She telephones Oliver’s father and during their 
        conversation asks Oliver to talk to him too. Oliver first responds with coldness: “’I will 
        never talk to him. Ever,’ I said with perfect calm” (87). Jennifer tries further, but Oliver is 
        adamant and refuses to converse with his father. Jennifer then  gives  Oliver’s father  a 
        message that she claims to originate from Oliver:  
         
             “Mr. Barrett, Oliver does want you to know that in his own special way…” 
               She paused for breath. She had been sobbing, so it wasn’t easy. I was much 
             too astonished to do anything but await the end of my alleged ‘message.’ 
             “Oliver loves you very much,” she said, and hung up very quickly. (88) 
         
        Oliver responds to this with anger: “‘God damn you, Jenny! Why don’t you get the hell out 
        of my life!’” (88). 
           Jennifer leaves before Oliver’s comment, when Oliver ‘rippes’ the telephone from 
        her  hand.  Thus  the  sixth  function  is  that  the  heroine  retaliates  by  punishing  the  hero. 
        Jennifer  does  this  by  leaving.  This  is  followed  by  the  seventh  function  which  is  the 
                            50 
         
        physical separation of the hero and heroine. Jennifer leaves and Oliver does not know 
        where she has gone. Oliver searches Jennifer for hours but is not able to find her until he 
        returns to their house and finds her sitting on the stairs. 
           The eighth and the ninth function, the hero treating the heroine tenderly and the 
        heroine responding warmly to this, take place between the functions one and two in the 
        narrative structure of Love Story. This is understandable as they are events that in an ideal 
        romance usually happen before the proposal, which in this narrative is not one of the 
        ending  functions.  These  functions,  then,  do  not  lead  to  the  tenth  function.  The  tenth 
        function implicates that the hero had been the aristocratic male who treated the heroine 
        ambiguously. As I have interpret the third function to be in Love Story that Oliver’s father 
        responds  to  Oliver  ambiguously,  the  tenth  function  is  in  Love  Story  Oliver’s 
        reinterpretation  of  his  father’s  ambiguous  behaviour  as  a  product  of  previous  hurt. 
        However, there is no such event in Love Story. There is no need for this since it was not 
        Oliver who treated Jennifer ambiguously, nor is there any need for them to get over this 
        function. Oliver and his father, on the other hand, will mend their relationship without this 
        function. 
           The eleventh function can be found in the form in which Radway wrote it, that is, 
        “[t]he hero proposes to the heroine” (134). As such this function would be simple enough, 
        but Radway continues it “with supreme act of tenderness” (134). The proposal does not 
        relate to the above mentioned functions logically in the manner as Radway suggests. In the 
        novel the proposal has already taken place after the first function and with no “supreme act 
        of tenderness”: 
         
               “What about our marriage?” 
                            51 
         
             It was I who spoke those words, although for a split second I wasn’t sure I 
             really had. 
               “Who said anything about marriage?” 
               “Me. I’m saying it now.” 
               “You want to marry me?” 
               “Yes.” 
               She tilted her head, did not smile, but merely inquired: “Why?”  
               I looked her straight in the eye. 
               “Because,” I said. 
               “Oh,” she said. “That’s a very good reason.” 
               She took my arm (not my sleeve this time), and we walked along the river. 
             There was nothing more to say, really. (47) 
               
        Jennifer does not answer ‘yes’ to the proposal which was a sudden one even to Oliver who 
        did the proposing. Love Story does not end in the proposal or the marriage which explains 
        why Oliver’s proposal is not the right interpretation for this function. Radway has other 
        suggestions since the function needs not always take the form of a proposal. One of them is 
        that the “hero demonstrates his unwavering commitment to the heroine with a supreme act 
        of tenderness” (134). Oliver shows his commitment to Jennifer throughout the novel, but 
        especially  after  he  has  proposed.  First  he  defies  his  father,  who  does  not  approve  the 
        marriage, then he searches Jennifer for hours when they have argued, and finally he tries 
        his best to act normally when the doctor tells him that Jennifer will die soon. He does so in 
        order to let Jennifer lead a normal life as long as possible, since there is nothing that the 
        doctors can do apart from easing her pain. Although Oliver indicates his commitment in 
        several ways, the event that qualifies for the eleventh function is when he goes to his father 
                            52 
         
        to  ask  for  money.  At  the  time  he  is  already  earning  quite  well,  but  the  treatment  for 
        Jennifer’s illness costs more than he can afford to himself. The act itself is not tender, since 
        it  is  asking for his financial assistance. However, because Oliver had earlier adamantly 
        refused even to talk to his father, the act becomes a demonstration of Oliver’s deep feelings 
        towards Jennifer. He would not have gone to see his father for any other reason than his 
        love for Jennifer. 
           The twelfth function is that the heroine responds sexually and emotionally. This is 
        not found in the narrative of Love Story between the functions eleventh and thirteenth; at 
        this point in the narrative the heroine is in the hospital about to die thus it is understandable 
        that she does not respond sexually. Nevertheless, the heroine does act emotionally: “’It’s 
        nobody’s fault, you preppie bastard,’ she was saying. ‘Would you please stop blaming 
        yourself!’”  (124;  emphasis  original).  Jennifer  knows  that  Oliver  feels  guilty  because 
        Jennifer has sacrificed her career to marry him, but she also wants him to know that for her 
        it was not a sacrifice. Rather, it was what she wanted: 
         
             “Screw Paris,” she said suddenly. 
             “Huh?” 
             “Screw Paris and music and all that crap you think you stole from me. I don’t 
             care, you sonovabitch. Can’t you believe that?” 
             “No,” I answered truthfully. 
             “Then get the hell out of here,” she said. “I don’t want you at my goddamn 
             deathbed.” (124) 
         
                            53 
         
        The heroine almost forces the hero to believe her as she feels so strongly on the subject. 
        Jennifer is so adamant that she lets Oliver stay only after Oliver has confirmed that he 
        believes her. 
           The thirteenth and the final function is that “[t]he heroine’s identity is restored,” but 
        in Love Story it is the hero’s identity that is restored (Radway 134). This happens after 
        Jennifer dies and Oliver walks out of the hospital. Oliver’s father, who has found out why 
        Oliver borrowed the money and rushed immediately to the hospital, learns from Oliver that 
        Jennifer has passed away. As the novel puts it: “And then I did what I had never done in 
        his presence, much less in his arms. I cried” (127). Oliver is thus reunited with his father. 
        His identity as the son of the Barrett family is restored. The restoration of his identity also 
        affirms his WASP identity and the patriarchal order.  
           The Smithton women claim that Erich Segal’s Love Story is not a romance, since 
        “[t]o qualify as a romance, the story must chronicle, not merely the events of a courtship 
        but  what  it  feels  like  to  be  the  object  of  one”  (Radway  64;  emphasis  original). 
        Nevertheless, Love Story includes several of the functions that Radway lists as elements of 
        an ideal romance and it is categorized as romance by Cawelti. In her discussion, Laura 
        Kinsale claims that Radway would have been right if she had stopped her sentence after 
        “what it feels like.” Kinsale argues that: 
         
             If Radway had stopped there, she would have been close to the heart of the 
             matter, but she goes on to say “what it feels like to be the object of one, though 
             this need not be accomplished by telling the story solely from the heroine’s 
             point of view.” Radway’s own italics in this second quote highlight where it is 
             that she falls victim to the belief that the female reader is identifying only with 
                            54 
         
             the  heroine,  whether  or  not  in  the  heroine’s  point  of  view.  (36;  emphasis 
             original) 
         
        Kinsale continues her critique by claiming that “[w]hen Radway says, ‘The focus never 
        shifts for these readers away from the woman at the center of the romance,’ I think she is 
        wrong. One hundred percent dead blind wrong. I flatly believe that the man carries the 
        book” (36; emphasis in original). This is, indeed, the case with Love Story.  
           In Love Story, the stereotypes that Cawelti mentions are found in the characters of 
        Oliver  and  Jennifer.  Oliver’s  character  embodies  the  stereotypes  of  the  ‘jock’  and  the 
        successful  WASP:  he  is  good  looking,  sure  of  himself,  wealthy,  has  many  friends,  is 
        intelligent,  and  has  a  reputation  among  the  ladies.  Jennifer,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
        stereotypical of the poor and smart college girl. She wears glasses, is smart and talented 
        enough to get a grant, since her father who is a single parent could not otherwise have 
        afforded sending her to Radcliffe. 
           As  I  discussed  in  the  section  2.2,  Cawelti  points  out  two  ways  in  which  the 
        stereotypes can be vitalized. Eric Segal has performed at least the second vitalization of 
        adding “touches of human complexity” to the character of Oliver. Despite his reputation 
        and the way he categorises girls: “There were two girls working there. One a tall tennis-
        anyone type, the other a bespectacled mouse type. I opted for Minnie Four-Eyes” (12), the 
        novel shows that Oliver has a sensitive side as well. The character of Oliver changes from 
        this stereotypical portrayal when he meets Jennifer. He is suddenly nervous and unsure of 
        himself when he falls in love with her. Oliver acts in a manner that indicates the difference 
        in his feelings for this particular girl:  
         
                            55 
         
             By now Jennifer had read my bio in the program. I made triple sure that Vic 
             Claman, the manager, saw that she got one.  
             “For Christ’s sake, Barrett, is this your first date?” 
             “Shut up, Vic, or you’ll be chewing your teeth.” (16; emphasis original) 
         
        Vic, who is the manager of the hockey team that Oliver plays in, notices that it seems as if 
        Oliver were on his first date when Jennifer comes to see him play hockey. Oliver acts so 
        since  in  reality  he  is  rather  experienced  in  dating  women  but  inexperienced  in  loving 
        someone. Nevertheless, according to Radway “they [the readers] prefer to see the heroine 
        desired, needed, and loved by a man who is strong and masculine, but equally capable of 
        unusual  tenderness,  gentleness,  and  concern  for  her  pleasure”  (81).  Oliver’s  character 
        combines these characteristics when he falls in love with Jennifer. As Daphne Clair states:  
         
             [the heroines] may be in their thirties or forties, older than most heroines of 
             twenty  years  ago,  while  the  typical  hero  is  often  younger  and  less  sure  of 
             himself  than  formerly.  Yet  the  classic  elements  of  romance  still  hold  the 
             imagination  of  vast  numbers  of  readers.  Beneath  the  faultlessly  cut  suit  or 
             designer jeans of many a civilised, seemingly liberal modern hero lurks the 
             untamed savage, Heathcliff. But no matter how he struggles and fumes, in the 
             end he is tamed and domesticated by a woman’s gentle strength. (70) 
         
           Although the Smithton women do not qualify Love Story as a romance, many of the 
        details they want from a romance can be found in it. Oliver is clearly described recognizing 
        his feelings for Jennifer. “What I am fumbling to say is that I felt different about Jennifer, 
        and didn’t know what to say or even who to ask about it. (‘You should have asked me,’ she 
                            56 
         
        said later.) I just knew I had these feelings. For her. For all of her” (40). To sum up, Love 
        Story  seems  to  contain  plenty  of  the  elements  the  Smithton  women  want  in  an  ideal 
        romance: not only does it follow the functions of an ideal romance but it contains the way 
        in which the hero realizes his own profound feelings for the heroine. 
         
         
        3.3 Intermarriage in Love Story 
         
        In the section 3.1 I brought up the role of ethnic difference in the backgrounds of Jennifer 
        and Oliver. In this section I will discuss the issue in more detail by concentrating on the 
        aspects of intermarriage and ethnicity and their portrayal in Love Story. 
           Jennifer’s ethnicity plays a role in Love Story since as a working-class ethnic heroine 
        she is not an ideal love object “for the heir to the Barrett name and fortune” (Pelzer 21). 
        Although she is portrayed in the novel to be proud of her roots she also has feelings of 
        inferiority  as she studies in the prestigious Radcliffe College on a scholarship amongst 
        students whose family can afford the tuition fees. Jennifer’s feelings of inferiority show in 
        the novel as she is about to meet Oliver’s parents and sees the driveway to their house for 
        the first time. It is a moment when Jennifer finally realizes the contrast between her and 
        Oliver’s  backgrounds.  Although  Jennifer  has  known  before  that  she  and  Oliver  have 
        different social statuses, it is when she sees the “half mile drive in from Groton Street to 
        Dover House proper” (49) and the buildings alongside the road that she begins to feel that 
        she should be someone else in order to qualify to marry in to the family. She asks Oliver: 
        “why is it I suddenly wish my name was Abigail Adams, or Wendy WASP?” (50). It 
        shows that Jennifer is aware of the importance of name. What this means is that Jennifer’s 
        last name is one of the first features that reveals her lower social status to Oliver’s parents. 
                            57 
         
        Jennifer’s reaction reveals that she feels that if her name sounded less ethnic, it would be 
        more acceptable. Jennifer herself is not an immigrant nor does she even speak Italian; it is 
        thus  her  name  Cavilleri  that  tells  unquestionably  of  her  ethnic  background.  In  the 
        beginning of the narrative, Jennifer is proud of her ethnicity, as can be noticed from how 
        she  introduces  herself  to  Oliver:  “’I’m  Jennifer  Cavilleri,’…’an  American  of  Italian 
        descent’” (13). She emphasizes her background although it became clear from her last 
        name. In the novel this is contrasted with Oliver’s introduction where he “confesses” that 
        his “entire name” is Oliver Barrett, but it is not his entire name since he leaves the numeral 
        out. The initial setting is quite different. Oliver is embarrassed or self-conscious of his 
        background whereas Jennifer is proud of hers. It seems as if the roles should be reversed. 
        Oliver’s  name  awakens  positive  connotations  whereas  Jennifer’s  Italian  name  evokes 
        memories of gangsters and an enemy at war. Jennifer is an Italian American character, 
        which makes her classifiable in the category of ‘PIGS’. Regardless her whiteness, she still 
        lacks something. As Guglielmo and Vecoli suggest, Italian American identity is a complex 
        one. To use the words of Gardaphé: 
         
             If not totally black, Italians have certainly complicated the notion of whiteness 
             in America so that they are neither totally white, and it is this in between status 
             that makes them likely candidates for assisting in the abolition of whiteness in 
             the  United  States.  For  those  who  can  naïvely  say  we  are  not  black,  others 
             counter with the truth, that we were not always white. (Leaving 135) 
         
        In contrast to Jennifer’s, Oliver’s name has a different impact. As Oliver puts it in the 
        novel: “[m]y illustrious name enabled us to establish a charge account at a grocery store 
                            58 
         
        which would otherwise have denied credit to students” (81). Oliver’s name also makes him 
        more desirable for law firms after he graduates and receives employment offers: 
         
             I was the only one who wasn’t Jewish. (And anyone who says it doesn’t matter 
             is full of it.) Christ, there are dozens of firms who will kiss the ass of a WASP 
             who can merely pass the bar. Consider the case of yours truly: Law Review, 
             all-Ivy, Harvard and you know what else. Hordes of people were fighting to get 
             my name and numeral onto their stationery. I felt like a bonus baby‒and I 
             loved every minute of it. (97‒98) 
         
           It is the name that evokes the notion of financial affluence as Jennifer realises when 
        applying for an employment: 
         
             “Of course, Shady Lane isn’t able to match the public school salaries,” Miss 
             Anne Miller Whitman, the principal, told my wife, adding something to the 
             effect that Barretts wouldn’t be concerned with “that aspect” anyway. Jenny 
             tried to dispel her illusions, but all she could get in addition to the already 
             offered thirty-five hundred for the year was about two minutes of “ho ho ho”s. 
             Miss Whitman thought Jenny was being so witty in her remarks about Barretts 
             having to pay the rent just like other people. (81) 
         
        As the Barrett name symbolizes wealth and respect, people assume that Jennifer and Oliver 
        are  wealthy.  The  name  actually  works  for  their  disadvantage  in  the  above  mentioned 
        situation as they are not believed to need money. Miss Whitman sees Jennifer Barrett as 
        someone from the  Barrett  family,  not  as  a  person  with  Italian  American  background. 
                            59 
         
        Through her marriage, Jennifer has lost her ethnic identity in the eyes of others. Gardaphé 
        claims that: 
         
             There is much that the many peoples who have come to America agree is 
             wonderful about living in this land, but the first lesson any immigrant group 
             learns is that ‘making it’ in this country happens at the expense ‘unmaking’ 
             ethnic identity and allegiance to Old World customs and behavior. This holds 
             true for intracultural institutions as well. When ‘making it’ means moving from 
             working  class,  to  middle  class,  to  upper  class,  sooner  or  later  we  must 
             understand that upward mobility means ascribing to the cultural values that 
             belong  to  each  class  and  to  the  category  of  whiteness;  ancestral  traditions 
             become ancillary side shows that we can foster only in our spare time. (Leaving 
             124‒5) 
              
        Jennifer has ‘unmade’ her ethnic identity upon marrying Oliver. The transformation of her 
        ethnic identity shows not only in her change of her name, but also because of her religion 
        as well. Even before she met Oliver, she had not been a practising Catholic, but her family 
        were not aware of this. This however becomes evident for them upon Jennifer marrying 
        Oliver  since  they  were  not  invited  to  the  wedding.  Oliver  states  that  their  “reason  for 
        excluding Jenny’s relatives was out of genuine concern that [their] omission of the Father, 
        Son and Holy Ghost would make the occasion far too trying for unlapsed Catholics” (74). 
        It  is  very  uncommon  for  the  Italian  culture  to  have  a  woman  support  her  husband 
        financially. The stereotypical Italian woman is married, she keeps the house tidy and cooks 
        big meals for her husband and children. Although Jennifer’s ethnic identity is ‘unmade’ 
        after their marriage, she finds it again when her and Oliver’s roles switch: Oliver takes the 
                            60 
         
        financial  responsibility  and  Jennifer  stays  at  home.  Oliver  describes  the  situation  after 
        Jennifer illness had been known for a month: “She was still doing the cooking; she insisted 
        on it. I had finally persuaded her to allow me to clean up (though she gave me heat about it 
        not  being  ‘man’s  work’)”  (114).  Thus  she  resorts  back  to  the  traditional  roles  for  the 
        husband and wife after first having the man’s role of earning the money. 
           Oliver’s parents can be seen as the purists that Sollors discusses, as they fear that 
        their  grandchildren  will  not  resemble  them.  In  this  novel  we  can  see  the  conventional 
        ending for intermarriage which Sollors emphasizes is often tragic in literature (Beyond 
        224). In Love Story the heroine, who has an ethnic background, is unable to conceive. In 
        fact after the couple start planning children the heroine is found out to be ill. As she dies 
        before she has ‘mixed blood’ children, the Barrett name stays ‘pure.’ 
           Jarmakani claims that the romance “authors sometimes use exotic tropes to give the 
        hero his hard edges” (896). As examples she mentions the Latin and Native American 
        heroes. She claims that “In constructing the figure of the Latin lover […] authors can 
        mobilize mainstream assumptions about machismo to signify alpha maleness. In Native 
        American heroes, romance authors can mobilize the fierce warrior stereotype” (Jarmakani 
        896). Jarmakani calls these types of heroes “exoticized romance heroes” (896). In Love 
        Story the ‘roles’ of the heroine and the hero are sometimes reversed, and it is not the hero 
        but  the  heroine  who  is  exoticized.  This  can  be  seen  when  Oliver  describes  Jennifer’s 
        background when he is about to meet her father for the first time: 
         
             I  mean,  here  I  would  be  bucking  that  lotsa  love  Italian-Mediterranean 
             syndrome, compounded by the fact that Jenny was an only child, compounded 
             by the fact that she had no mother, which meant abnormally close ties to her 
                            61 
         
             father.  I  would  be  up  against  all  those  emotional  forces  the  psych  books 
             describe. (63) 
         
           In Love Story, Jennifer is about to achieve the American Dream: she has studied at a 
        prestigious university and she has been accepted to study abroad with a famous music 
        teacher. If Jennifer went there, she could become a famous musician, be independent, and 
        have a good income on her own. As a result, her social status would improve. Her reality in 
        the  novel,  however,  is  “quite  the  opposite  of  the  American  fantasy”  (Friedman,  177). 
        Although Jennifer has a free choice of her love object, i.e., her family lets her choose 
        whom she loves, she is not ‘free’ to marry him. The objection comes from Oliver’s side, 
        which is the Anglo-American side. She marries Oliver but he no longer receives financial 
        support from his family and it is Jennifer who has to support him. She takes on a job as a 
        teacher in order to do so and thus sacrifices her future as a musician. In Friedman’s words, 
        Jennifer is “shut out of that [American] Dream […] through marriage” (177).  
           Love  Story  also  shows  that  Jennifer  has  the  destiny  of  the  invisible  immigrants 
        Friedman discusses. She was more assimilated and achieved more before her marriage. 
        Jennifer loses her own ambition after she marries Oliver. At first she supports Oliver while 
        he  still  studies,  but  after  he  graduates  and  begins  working  at  a  well-paying  law  firm, 
        Jennifer moves with him to New York and becomes a housewife. She becomes invisible 
        without her active role in the public. When Oliver’s ‘friends’ invite them over, Jennifer 
        says: “’Fuck ‘em, Oliver. I don’t want to waste two days bullshitting with a bunch of vapid 
        preppies”  (101).  Unlike  Oliver,  who  plays  squash  with  a  friend  several  times  a  week, 
        Jennifer has no social life after their move to New York. She “disappears” behind her 
        husband as she remains in the domestic sphere, and in addition to this, her invisibility takes 
        on another meaning when she begins to fade away physically. First, she loses weight as her 
                            62 
         
        illness  progresses  and  thus  becomes  less  visible;  second,  she  dies  and  becomes  truly 
        invisible. Much like Cora’s death in The Last of the Mohicans after Jennifer dies she no 
        longer threatens “the boundaries drawn between races and cultures” (Dean 64). Similarly 
        to Heyward, Oliver is now free to marry a WASP, thus protecting the racial integrity of the 
        Barrett bloodline.  
           Oliver  is  very  competitive  and  winning  appeals  to  him.  As  he  thrives  to  be 
        successful, Jennifer’s career and hopes are less important. It is not mentioned in the novel 
        why Jennifer has to choose between her marriage to Oliver and going to Paris to study. It is 
        taken  for  granted  that  Jennifer  is  the  one  who  sacrifices  her  career  and  “becomes 
        invisible”. Oliver is thus already conforming to the values of his status.  
           In Love Story, Jennifer does not achieve success by her marriage to a successful man. 
        In fact she makes him successful and independent by acting as the incentive for Oliver to 
        break free from his family. Jennifer does not do this actively but she becomes the means to 
        Oliver  to  find  his  independence.  Oliver  uses  her,  although  unintentionally,  to  gain 
        independence and after she has fulfilled that role, she has no purpose in the mostly WASP 
        society. 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
                            63 
         
        4. Conclusion 
         
        In this thesis my aim was to demonstrate that Erich Segal’s Love Story is a romance novel 
        despite its unconventional romance elements. In the introductory chapter of my thesis, I 
        gave a brief description of Erich Segal and his career. I also pointed out the criticism Love 
        Story received after its publication while providing a short summary of the novel’s plot. 
           The theory chapter of my thesis consists of three sections. The section 2.1 discusses 
        the  history  of  romance  genre,  from  its  origins  to  more  contemporary  popular romance 
        novels. As the genre has been through several changes, it was important to examine what 
        the true elements of romance are that characterize the whole genre. It became evident that 
        despite these changes there are elements that stem from the older romances. One of the 
        characterizing elements of the genre is its iterability: romance novels have elements that 
        refer back to older texts that are repeated and rewritten. 
           Since Love Story is a popular novel from 1970, it was important to concentrate in 
        detail  on  the  more  modern popular romance novels. In the section 2.2 of my thesis, I 
        discussed the formula of popular romance novels. Since the term formula refers to both 
        plot types and cultural stereotypes I examined first the plot type of romance and then the 
        conventional way in which the hero and heroine are treated in romance novels. Although 
        there  are  different  summaries  that  describe  the  typical  romance  novel  plot,  I  found 
        Radway’s list of functions to be the most useful. Those functions provide a summary of the 
        narrative  structure  of  the  ideal  romance.  As  the  second  usage  of  the  term  formula,  I 
        discovered that during the period of late 1960s to 1970s, the conventional stereotype for 
        the heroine was the intelligent and achieving college girl. It is also conventional for the 
        hero and heroine to be ideal people. 
                            64 
         
           In  the  last  theory  section  of  my  thesis,  I  discussed  the  role  of  intermarriage  in 
        romance  literature.  I  began  by  providing  a  brief  description  of  the  attitude  towards 
        ethnicity during the decades before Love Story was published in order to show that the 
        Italian American identity is a complex one and significantly different as opposed to the 
        majority  of  Americans.  I  gave  examples  of  the  portrayal  of  ethnicity  in  academic 
        publications as well as in the texts of Italian Americans themselves. In the latter part of the 
        section I discussed the role of intercultural relationships in literature. I discovered that the 
        mixed marriages often appeared hazardous in American literature, and the ending of such 
        unions were typically tragic. 
           I concentrated in my analysis of Love Story to the conventions of romance. In the 
        section 3.1 I analyzed the romance elements that stem from the older romances. One of the 
        important  aspects  of  this  section  was  to  discover  the  significance  of  the  untraditional 
        romance ending of Love Story. As I hope to have shown, the ending of Love Story is sad 
        but not a hopeless one. The love between the protagonists does not end in the death of the 
        heroine, but it continues in the memories of the hero. Another love story also begins, as the 
        father and son are reunited. The return of the prodigal son back to his family also validates 
        the love story between the protagonists as the father realizes the depth of his son’s feelings 
        towards the heroine. He learns that the relationship between Oliver and Jennifer was not 
        merely  an  act  of  rebellion  against  him  but  it  was  true  love.  The  father  can  now  be 
        convinced of it as the poor ethnic heroine did not gain anything from the marriage. 
           In  the  section  3.2  of  my  thesis  I  analysed  Love  Story  on  the  basis  of  Radway’s 
        thirteen functions. Since Love Story contains unconventional romance elements I needed to 
        modify the functions: the roles of the hero and heroine are often reversed so I needed to 
        reverse them in some of the functions as well. After the modification most of the functions 
                            65 
         
        were found from Love Story, despite the Smithton women’s claim that Love Story is not a 
        true romance.  
           In the final part of my analysis I concentrated on the role of ethnicity in Love Story. 
        As the heroine of the novel is a poor Italian American girl, she is not considered a suitable 
        bride to the hero. The hero’s WASP background is contrasted to the heroine’s Catholicism 
        and  ethnicity.  At  first  it  seems  that  the  heroine  achieves  the  American  Dream  as  she 
        marries the hero despite his family’s refusal to accept the union. She has ‘unmade’ her 
        ethnic identity working as Jennifer Barrett in the WASP society, while the hero continues 
        his studies. However, when Oliver graduates and is employed, Jennifer loses her role in the 
        American society. She also loses her American Dream as she disappears behind Oliver’s 
        success. She begins to fade away because of her illness and finally is out of sight altogether 
        as she dies. When dead, she is no longer a threat to the Barrett family as she can no longer 
        benefit  from  their  wealth.  Similarly,  Oliver’s  father  no  longer  needs  to  fear  that  the 
        relationship  will  produce  mixed-race  children.  The  reason  for  the  son’s  and  father’s 
        disparity is gone. The vivacity of the Italian American girl has taught the cold Anglo-
        Saxons how to love with her words of wisdom: “[l]ove means not ever having to say 
        you’re sorry” (127). As the love between the couple continues despite the heroine’s death, 
        the novel is still capable of continuing the tradition of tragic endings for interracial couples 
        while keeping its status as a romance novel.  
           A possible future research topic is the oedipal relationship between Oliver and his 
        father as Oliver’s inability to express his love for his father suggests. The role of ethnicity 
        in Love Story can still be examined further as well as the role of the dialogue between 
        Jennifer and Oliver.  
         
         
                            66 
         
        References 
         
        “Behind the Scenes: Mel Zerman on the Marketing of Erich Segal’s Love Story.” Online.
           http://www.americanlegends.com/Interviews/erich_segal.html. Accessed 05/22/2013. 
        Barlow,  Linda  and  Jayne  Ann  Krentz.  ”Beneath  the  Surface:  The  Hidden  Codes  of 
           Romance.” In Krentz 15‒29. 
        Brackett,  Virginia.  Classic  Love  and  Romance  Literature:  An  Encyclopedia  of  Works, 
           Characters, Authors and Themes. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1999. 
        Burley, Stephanie. “What’s a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Book like This?: Homoerotic 
           Reading and Popular Romance.” In Strehle and Carden 127‒146. 
        Cannistraro,  Philip  and  Gerald  Meyer,  eds.  The  Lost  World  of  Italian-American 
           Radicalism: Politics, Labor, and Culture. Westport: Praeger Publishers, 2003. 
        Cawelti, John G. Adventure, Mystery, and Romance: Formula Stories as Art and Popular 
           Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976. 
        Clair, Daphne. “Sweet Subversions.” In Krentz 61‒72. 
        Dean,  Janet.  “Stopping  Traffic:  Spectacles  of  Romance  and  Race  in  The  Last  of  the 
           Mohicans.” In Strehle and Carden 45‒66. 
        Friedman, Natalie. “Marriage and the Immigrant Narrative: Anzia Yezierska’s Salome of
            the Tenements.” Legacy 22 (2005): 176‒186. 
        Fowler, Bridget. The Alienated Reader: Women and Romantic Literature in the Twentieth 
           Century. Hertfordshire: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991. 
        Fox, Margalit. “Erich Segal, ‘Love Story’ Author, Dies at 72.” Online. Published January 
           19,  2010.  http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/20/books/20segal.html?_r=1.  Accessed 
           06/04/2012. 
        Fuchs, Barbara. Romance. New York: Routledge, 2004. 
                                                               67 
                   
                  Gardaphé, Fred. “Follow the Red Brick Road.” In Cannistraro and Meyer 265‒272. 
                  ‒‒‒.   From  Wiseguys  to  Wise  Men:  The  Gangster  and  Italian  American 
                        Masculinities. New York: Routledge, 2006. 
                  ‒‒‒.  Leaving  Little  Italy:  Essaying  Italian  American  Culture.  Albany:  State 
                        University of New York Press, 2004. 
                  Guglielmo,  Jennifer.  “Donne  Ribelli:  Recovering  the  History  of  Italian  Women’s 
                        Radicalism in the United States.” In Cannistraro and Meyer 113‒141. 
                  Hansson,  Heidi.  Romance  Revived:  Postmodern  Romances  and  the  Tradition.  Umeå: 
                        Umeå University, 1998. 
                  Hughes, Helen. The Historical Romance. London: Routledge, 1993. 
                  Ibson, John. “Virgin Land or Virgin Mary? Studying the Ethnicity of White Americas.” 
                        American Quarterly 33 (1981): 284‒308. 
                  Jarmakani, Amira. “Desiring the Big Bad Blade: Racing the Sheikh in Desert Romances.” 
                        American Quarterly 63 (2011): 895−928. 
                  Jones, Ann Rosalind. “Mills & Boon Meets Feminism.” In Radford 195−218. 
                  Kinsale, Laura. “The Androgynous Reader: Point of View in the Romance.” In Krentz 31‒
                        44. 
                  Krentz, Jayne Ann ed. Dangerous Men and Adventurous Women: Romance Writers on the 
                        Appeal of the Romance. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992. 
                  ‒‒‒. “Introduction.” In Krentz 1‒9. 
                  Long,  Elizabeth.  The  American  Dream  and  the  Popular  Novel.  Boston:  Routledge  & 
                        Kegan Paul, 1985. 
                  Luconi, Stefano. From Paesani to White Ethnics: The Italian Experience in Philadelphia. 
                        Albany: State University of New York Press, 2001. 
                            68 
         
        McDermott, Hubert. Novel and Romance: The Odyssey to Tom Jones. Hong Kong: The 
           McMillan Press, 1989. 
        Modleski, Tania. Loving with a Vengeance: Mass-produces Fantasies for Women. London: 
           Routledge, 1990. 
        Pearce, Lynne. Romance Writing. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2007. 
        Pearce, Lynne and Jackie Stacey, eds. Romance Revisited. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 
           1995. 
        Pelzer, Linda C. Erich Segal: A Critical Companion. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood 
           Press, 1997. 
        Philips, Deborah. Women’s Fiction 1945‒2005: Writing Romance. London: Continuum, 
           2006. 
        Radford, Jean ed. The Progress of Romance: The Politics of Popular Fiction. London: 
           Routledge, 1986. 
        Radway, Janice A. Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature. 
           1984. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991. 
        Segal, Erich. Love Story. London: Hodder Paperbacks, 1971. 
        Sollors, Werner. Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and Descent in American Culture. New York: 
           Oxford University Press, 1986. 
        ‒‒‒. “Theory of American Ethnicity, or “? s Ethnic?/ti and American/ti, de or United (w) 
           States s s1 and Theor?”” American Quarterly 33 (1981): 257‒283. 
        Stacey, Jackie and Lynne Pearce. “The Heart of the Matter: Feminists Revisit Romance.” 
           In Pearce and Stacey 11‒45. 
        Strehle,  Susan  and  Mary  Paniccia  Carden,  eds.  Doubled  Plots:  Romance  and  History. 
           Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2003. 
                            69 
         
        Vecoli, Rudolph J. “The Making and Un-Making of the Italian American Working Class.” 
           In Cannistraro and Meyer 51−75. 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
                            70 
         
        Finnish Summary 
         
        Romanssikirjallisuutta on pitkään pidetty ala-arvoisena kirjallisuuden lajina. Harva tietää 
        kuinka paljon rohkeutta vaatii naiselta avata romanssi lentokoneessa, sillä yhteiskunta on 
        aina tuomitsemassa kirjallisuuden lisäksi lukijankin. Erich Segal olisi voinut lisätä tähän 
        että yhteiskunta tuomitsee myös kirjailijan. 
           Tutkielmassani  analysoin  Erich  Segalin  romaania  Love  Story  (Rakkaustarina). 
        Aikomukseni on osoittaa että Love Story on romanssi kuten sen nimi vihjaa. Tämä on 
        kyseenalaistettu, sillä nimestään huolimatta Love Story sisältää romanssille epätyypillisiä 
        konventioita, kuten esimerkiksi, että tarina ei lopu päähenkilöiden naimisiinmenon jälkeen 
        vaan vasta myöhemmin kun toinen päähenkilöistä kuolee.  
           Love Story on Erich Segalin ensimmänen romaani. Hän kirjoitti sen ensin elokuvan 
        käsikirjoitukseksi ja muokkasi romaaniksi. Love Story julkaistiin helmikuussa 1970 ja siitä 
        tuli vielä samana vuonna best-seller. Erich Segal oli yliopisto-opettaja joka opetti kreikan- 
        ja latinankielistä kirjallisuutta Yalen, Harvardin ja Princetonin yliopistoissa. Love Storyn 
        suosio  kuitenkin  vähensi  Erich  Segalin  akateemista  arvostusta  ja  hän  suostui  jäämään 
        virkavapaalle  virastaan  Yalen  yliopistosta.  1971  Love  Story  nimettiin  ehdolle  National 
        Book Awardin saajaksi, mutta ehdokkuus peruttiin tuomariston viiden jäsenen uhatessa 
        erollaaan. Erich Segal kuoli vuonna 2010 Englannissa, jonne hän oli muuttanut aiemmin. 
           Love  Story  on  kertomus  Oliver  Barrett  IV:n  ja  Jennifer  Cavillerin  rakkaudesta. 
        Oliverin perhe on jo vuosia ollut rikas ja arvostettu ja perheen perinteenä on jo pitkään 
        ollut opiskelu Harvardissa. Jennifer taasen on Italian amerikkalaisen työläisperheen tytär, 
        joka opiskelee musiikkia Radcliffen Collegessa. Oliver ja Jennifer rakastuvat ja päättävät 
        mennä naimisiin Oliverin perheen vastustuksesta huolimatta. Oliverin perhe ei tämän takia 
        enää  anna  taloudellista  tukea  Oliverin  opiskelua  varten,  joten  Jennifer  menee  töihin 
                            71 
         
        elättääkseen  Oliveria  tämän  jatkaessa  opintojaan.  Lopulta  Oliver  valmistuu  ja  saa 
        hyväpalkkaisen työn asianajajana, jolloin pariskunta alkaa toivoa perheenlisäystä. Koska 
        sitä ei ala kuulua, he menevät lääkäriin jossa selviääkin että Jenniferillä on parantumaton 
        sairaus. Jennifer joutuu sairaalaan kalliisiin syöpähoitoihin kunnes lopulta kuolee.  Love 
        Story sai paljon negatiivista kritiikkiä osakseen, vaikka teos olikin lukijoiden arvostama. 
        Kriitikot eivät pitäneet muun muassa kliseiden runsaudesta.  
           Aloitan romanssin teorian käsittelyn tutkimalla romanttisen kirjallisuuden alkuperää 
        ja niitä romansseille tunnusomaisia piirteitä, jotka ovat luonnehtineet genreä alusta lähtien. 
        Näitä piirteitä ovat ensiksi se, että aiheena on yhden ihmisen tarina kansakunnan tarinan 
        sijaan, toiseksi se, että seikkailujen lisäksi kerrotaan rakkaudesta ja seksuaalisuudesta, ja 
        lopuksi se, että tarina loppuu onnellisesti. Muita romanssille tunnusomaisia piirteitä tuli 
        esiin Odysseian jälkeen kirjoitetuista romansseista: niissä on mm. juonenkäänteitä, joissa 
        hahmon  henkilöllisyys  on  ensin  epäselvä  ja  totuus  selviää  tarinan  edetessä:  niiden 
        päähenkilöt ovat ihanteellisia ihmisiä: he ovat kauniita, viisaita tai molempia, ja juoneen 
        liittyy olennaisesti ihmeitä, hirviöitä, tehtäviä ja koetuksia. 
           Romanssien kirjoittajat ovat toistaneet samoja aiheita romaaneissaan ja kirjoittaneet 
        suosituimpia tarinoita yhä uudelleen. Varsinkin kreikkalaiset ja roomalaiset legendat olivat 
        suosittuja tarinoita, jotka ensin kirjoitettiin latinaksi ja myöhemmin käännettiin ranskaksi. 
        Samalla niitä muokattiin sopimaan eri aikaan ja paikkaan. Näin tarinoihin, jotka sijoittuivat 
        menneisyyteen, tulivat näkyviin 1100-luvun hovin ja ritarikulttuurin ulkoiset merkit. 
           Alun  perin  romanssit  eivät  olleet  tarinoita  rakkaudesta  vaan  seikkailuista,  mutta 
        keskiajalla tämä muuttui. Ne koetukset ja seikkailut, jotka olivat aiemmissa romansseissa 
        olleet ritarin haasteena, olivat Chaucerin ja Maloryn romansseissa romanttisen rakkauden 
        aiheuttamia. Rakkaudesta tuli täten keskiajalla romanssin aihe, ja  aiempien romanssien 
                                                                              72 
                        
                       uskomattomat  ulkoapäin  tulevat  haasteet  muokkautuivat  rakastuneen  ihmisen  sisäisiksi 
                       haasteiksi: epäilyiksi ja mustasukkaisuudeksi. 
                              Samalla  kun  romanssin  kirjoittajat  alkoivat  kirjoittaa  rakkaudesta,  he  alkoivat 
                       enenevässä  määrin  keskittyä  kirjoituksessaan  naisten  näkökulmaan.  Naisnäkökulmaan 
                       siirtyminen  johtui  myös  siitä,  että  1500-luvun  jälkeen  myös  naiset  alkoivat  kirjoittaa 
                       romansseja  eikä  kirjoittaminen  ollut  enää  vain  miesten  alaa.  Romanssien  aihe  vaihtui 
                       kreikkalaisten  legendojen  seikkailevista  miehistä  tosirakkautta  etsiviksi  naisiksi,  mutta 
                       samalla kreikkalaisia ja roomalaisia legendoja kirjoitettiin yhä vain uudelleen. 1700-luvulla 
                       romanssi  koki  lisää  muutoksia,  sillä  yhä  useampi  ihminen  pystyi  ostamaan  romaaneja 
                       painokoneen keksimisen vuoksi: kirjoista tuli kasvaneen tarjonnan myötä edullisempia. 
                              Lukijakunnan         määrän        kasvaessa       myös       kysyntä      kasvoi      ja     siitä    tuli 
                       monimuotoisempaa. Toisaalta lukijat halusivat lukea viettelyksestä kertovia tarinoita, ja 
                       toisaalta  he  halusivat  hyveellisempiä  sankarittaria.  Eräs  kirjallisuuden  tutkija  jaottelee 
                       1700-luvun romanssit kolmeen osaan: goottilaisiin romansseihin, kosiskeluromansseihin ja 
                       viettelyromansseihin.  Viettelyromanssien  olemassaolo  voi  tulla  yllätyksenä  niille,  jotka 
                       ovat tottuneet lukemaan mm. Jane Austenin ja Brontën sisarusten teoksia. On kuitenkin 
                       tärkeää  olla  tietoinen  näiden  viettelystä  ja  seksuaalisuudesta  kertovien  romaanien 
                       olemassaolosta,  sillä  ne  ovat  varhaisimpia  versioita  suosituista  1970-luvulta  alkaen 
                       tehdyistä      romansseista,         joista     käytetään       nimeä       harlekiiniromanssit.          Näissä 
                       harlekiiniromansseissa,         kuten      kosiskeluromansseissakin,  tärkeää  on  sankarittaren 
                       hyveellisyys. Klassisen kaavan mukaan hän taistelee ylemmän luokkataustan omaavaan 
                       sankarin lähentelyjä vastaan, kunnes tälle ei jää muuta mahdollisuutta kuin kosia. Tämä 
                       romanssien kaavamaisuus on osa niiden suosiota: ne ovat muunnelmia peruskaavasta ja 
                       siksi entuudestaan jo tuttuja lukijoille. 
                                                            73 
                  
                       Osiossa  2.2  käsittelen  tarkemmin  romanssin  kaavaa,  joka  on  käsitteenä 
                 kaksitahoinen:  se  kuvaa  sekä  universaalia  juonikuviota,  että  henkilöhahmojen 
                 stereotyyppistä  kuvausta,  joka  on  sidoksissa  aikaan  ja  kulttuuriin.  Tärkeä  romanssin 
                 juonikuvion  kaava  on  Radwayn  13  funktiota,  jotka  kuvaavat  sankarittaren  kasvua 
                 epävarmasta  nuoresta  itsevarmaksi  aikuiseksi  naiseksi.  Radwayn  lista  pohjautuu 
                 Smithtonin  naisten,  jotka  ovat  ryhmä  innokkaita  romanssikirjallisuuden  lukijoita, 
                 valitsemiin  romansseihin.  Nämä  naiset  väittävät,  että  Love  Story  ei  täytä  romanssin 
                 tunnuspiirteitä ja siksi käytänkin tätä kaavaa analyysini pohjana. 
                       Kaava tyypillisille romanssin sankarille ja sankarittarelle on kokenut muutoksia ajan 
                 myötä.  Samalla  kun  yliopistoissa  opiskelevien  naisten  määrä  kasvoi,  yleistyi 
                 kirjallisuudessa opiskelemaan lähtevä nuoren naisen tarina. Koska naiset olivat edelleen 
                 vähemmistönä  yliopistoissa,  näiden  tarinoiden  tyypillinen  opiskelijatyttö  oli  älykäs 
                 suorittaja. Romanssin sankaritar on älykkyyden lisäksi usein myös verbaalisesti lahjakas: 
                 hän hurmaa ja haastaa rakastajansa sanailullaan. Sankarittarien ei tarvitse olla huolissaan 
                 suoruudestaan sillä romanssien sankarit ovat yhtä vahvoja kuin hekin. Nämä sankarit ja 
                 sankarittaret ovat muullakin tavoin ’parempia ihmisiä:’ he ovat onnekkaampia, vahvempia 
                 ja  rohkeampia  sekä  osaavat  löytää  täydellisen  kumppanin  itselleen.  He  ovat  lisäksi 
                 fyysisesti muita viehättävämpiä. 
                       Viimeisessä  teoria  osiossa  tarkastelen  etnisyyden  ja  kulttuurien  välisten 
                 ihmissuhteiden     merkitystä    kirjallisuudessa.   Aloitan    pohtimalla    millainen 
                 amerikanitalialaisten  minäkuva  oli  1900-luvulla  ja  mitkä  asiat  siihen  vaikuttivat.  Näitä 
                 asioita  ovat  mm.  amerikanitalialaisuuden  yhdistäminen  mafiaan  ja  gangstereihin,  sekä 
                 sodan aikana viholliseen. Pohdin myös nimen merkitystä etnisenä tunnuksena, sitä miten 
                 se  on  tunnuksena  konkreettinen  ja  luo  siten  yhteenkuuluvuutta  etnisen  ryhmän  sisällä, 
                 mutta erottaa samalla muista. Lopuksi käsittelen sitä miten kulttuurien välisiä ihmissuhteita 
                            74 
         
        kuvataan kirjallisuudessa. Usein näiden ihmissuhteiden kohtalot kuvataan traagisiksi sillä 
        niiden  katsotaan  uhmaavan  asioiden  luonnollista  järjestystä.  Tämän  takia  tällaiset 
        ihmissuhteet ovat harvoin romanssin aiheena sillä sellainen antaisi ymmärtää että tarinalla 
        on traaginen loppu tyypillisen onnellisen lopun sijaan. Viimeisessä Mohikaanissa kuvataan 
        kulttuurien  välistä  ihmissuhdetta.  Siinä  Cora,  jonka  annetaan  ymmärtää  olevan  vain 
        puoliksi valkoinen, rakastuu mohikaaniin nimeltä Uncas, mutta heidän tarinansa päättyy 
        verisesti. Kuollessaan Cora ei enää uhkaa rotujen ja kulttuurien välisiä rajoja eikä haasta 
        kauaksi  ulottuvaa  valkoista  patriarkaalista  hallintojärjestelmää.  Vaikka  romansseissa 
        harvoin käsitellään kulttuurien välisiä rakkaustarinoita, ovat ne yleisiä maahanmuuttajien 
        teksteissä.  Friedman  ehdottaa  artikkelissaan,  että  maahanmuuttajanaisen  sopeutuminen 
        Yhdysvaltoihin  onnistuu  paremmin  työn  kuin  avioliiton  avulla.  Mennessään  naimisiin 
        maahanmuuttajanainen  on  vaarassa  muuttua  näkymättömäksi,  sillä  usein  avioliitto 
        Yhdysvalloissa on yhtä patriarkaalinen instituutio kuin alkuperäisessä kotimaassakin. 
           Love  Storyn  analyysissa  keskityn  kahteen  aiheeseen:  siihen  miten  romaanissa 
        hyödynnetään romanssin käytäntöjä ja sen tapaan kuvata etnisyyttä. Ensimmäinen aihe on 
        jaettu  kahteen  osaan.  Käsittelen  ensin  mitä  romanssille  alkujaan  tunnusomaisia piirteitä 
        Love Storyssä esiintyy ja sen jälkeen tutkin Love Storyä Radwayn 13 funktion pohjalta. 
        Analyysini mukaan Love Story sisältää monia romanssin tunnusomaisia piirteitä, mutta ei 
        sille  ominaista  onnellista  loppua.  Love  Storyn  loppu  on  kuitenkin  surullisuudestaan 
        huolimatta toiveikas, sillä päähenkilö ei lakkaa rakastamasta kirjan sankaritarta. Heidän 
        välinen  rakkautensa  säilyy  päähenkilön  muistoissa  sankarittaren  kuoleman  jälkeenkin, 
        mikä vihjaa että heidän rakkautensa on jättänyt pysyvän vaikutuksen. Se että Love Story ei 
        lopu onnellisesti voi osittain johtua siitä aikakaudesta milloin se on kirjoitettu. Vuosien 
        1969  ja  1975  välisen  ajan  menestyskirjoissa  onnelliset  loput  olivat  tavallista 
        harvinaisempia. Love Story loppuu siihen, että Jenniferin kuoleman jälkeen Oliver halaa 
                            75 
         
        isäänsä ja he unohtavat erimielisyytensä. Täten lopun toiveikkuutta lisää myös Oliverin 
        paluu perheensä pariin.  
           Love  Storyn  kaava  seuraa  enimmäkseen  Radwayn  13:a  funktiota,  mutta  koska 
        romaanissa  on  kyse  Oliverin,  eikä  Jenniferin,  kasvusta  itsenäiseksi  aikuiseksi 
        tutkimuksessa  oli  tarpeen  muokata  joitakin  funktioita.  Love  Storyssä  sankari  kokee 
        menetyksen, reagoi vihamielisesti yläluokkaista miestä edustavaan hahmoon eli isäänsä, 
        joka sen jälkeen lakkaa tukemasta Oliveria taloudellisesti. Nämä ovat ensimmäiset kolme 
        funktiota  muokattuina  niin,  että  sankaritar  on  vaihtunut  sankariksi.  Tällä  tavoin  Love 
        Storystä  löytyy  myös  viimeinen  funktio  Oliverin  halatessa  isäänsä  romaanin  lopussa: 
        sankarin identiteetti palaa ennalleen hänen löytäessään jälleen yhteys perheeseensä. Muut 
        funktiot  ovat  Love  Storyssä  sellaisenaan  paitsi  neljäs  ja  kymmenes,  joita  ei  löydy 
        ollenkaan.  Analyysini mukaan Love Story sisältää 11 Radwayn 13:sta funktiosta, jotka 
        määrittelevät ihanteellisen romanssin kaavan.  
           Viimeisessä  osiossa  keskityn  kuvaamaan  etnisyyden  merkitystä  Love  Storyssä. 
        Jennifer ei ole köyhän etnisen taustansa takia Oliverin perheen mielestä sopiva kumppani 
        Oliverille.  Jennifer  on  taustastaan  ylpeä,  mutta  tuntee  myös  alemmuutta  mikä  selviää 
        hänen toiveestaan olla nimeltään Wendy WASP, kun Oliver vie hänet ensimmäistä kertaa 
        tapaamaan vanhempiaan. Tämä myös osoittaa Jenniferin ymmärtävän nimen merkityksen 
        etnisenä tunnuksena. Kun Jenniferin nimi muuttuu avioliiton myötä Jennifer Barrettiksi, on 
        tilanne  erilainen:  sillä  Jenniferiä  ei  enää  pidetä  köyhänä  amerikanitalialaisena  vaan 
        rikkaana  Barrettin  perheen  jäsenenä.  Hän  on  täten  saavuttanut  amerikkalaisen  unelman 
        avioliiton  myötä,  mutta  vain  näennäisesti.  Todellisuudessa  hän  katoaa  aviomiehensä 
        menestyksen taakse, sillä samalla kun Oliver valmistuu ja pääsee töihin, Jennifer jää kotiin, 
        pois näkyvistä. Tämä katoaminen korostuu Love Storyssä Jenniferin sairastuessa, jolloin 
        hän alkaa laihtuessaan konkreettisesti kadota. Lopulta hän katoaa täysin kuollessaan, kuten 
                            76 
         
        Cora  Viimeisessä  mohikaanissa.  Jenniferin  kuolema  poistaa  uhan  Barrettien  verilinjaa 
        ’puhtautta’ kohtaan, sillä Oliver on sen jälkeen vapaa löytämään itselleen ’sopivamman’ 
        kumppanin.  
           Tavoitteenani oli osoittaa että Love Story on romanssi ja omasta mielestäni onnistuin 
        siinä. Tähän on kolme syytä. Ensiksi Love Storyn päähenkilöiden välinen rakkaus jatkuu 
        Oliverin  muistoissa  Jenniferin  kuoleman  jälkeen.  Toiseksi  Love  Storyn  juoni  mukailee 
        suurimmaksi  osaksi  ihanteellisen  romanssin  kaavaa.  Kolmas  syy  on  se,  että  vaikka 
        romanssin tunnusmerkkeihin ei yleensä kuulu sankarittaren kuolema, Love Story yhdistää 
        perinteisen  kulttuurien  rajat  ylittävän  ihmissuhteen  traagisen  kohtalon  romanssiin,  joka 
        kuvaa täydellistä rakkautta, jota ulkoiset seikat eivät pysty tuhoamaan. 
