                                                                    
                                                       High Field Surgery 
                                                 Travel Health Advice Leaflet 
                                                                    
                                 The following information will help you to stay healthy on your trip.   
                              Please make sure you read it following on from your appointment with us.   
               
              WATER 
              Diseases can be caught from drinking contaminated water, or swimming in it.   
              Unless you know the water supply is safe where you are staying,  
              ONLY USE (in order of preference)         
                      1. Boiled water  
                      2. Bottled water or canned drinks  
                      3. Water treated by a sterilising agent.                                     
              This includes water used to make ice cubes in drinks and water for cleaning your teeth                                                                                                 
                       
              SWIMMING                                                                                               
              It is safer to swim in water that is well chlorinated.  If you are travelling to Africa, South America or some 
              parts of the Caribbean, avoid swimming in fresh water lakes and streams.  You can catch a parasitic 
              disease called schistosomiasis from such places.  This disease is also known as Bilharzia.  It is also wise 
              never to go barefoot, but to wear protective footwear when out, even on the beach.  Other diseases can 
              be caught from sand and soil, particularly wet soil.                                            
                                                    
              FOOD                                                                                                       
              Contaminated food is the commonest source of many diseases abroad.  You can help prevent it by 
              following these guidelines :       
           
                ONLY  EAT  WELL  COOKED  FRESH  FOOD 
                AVOID  LEFTOVERS  and  REHEATED  FOODS 
                ENSURE  MEAT  IS  THOROUGHLY  COOKED                              Two phrases to help you remember 
                EAT  COOKED VEGETABLES, AVOID SALADS                                                  
                ONLY  EAT  FRUIT  YOU  CAN  PEEL                                     COOK IT, PEEL IT, OR LEAVE IT! 
                NEVER  DRINK  UNPASTEURISED  MILK                                   WHEN IN DOUBT, LEAVE IT OUT! 
                AVOID  ICE-CREAM                                                                    
                SHELLFISH IS A HIGH RISK FOOD                                                        
                AVOID  BUYING  FOOD  FROM  STREET  VENDORS’ STALLS AS A GENERAL RULE 
               
              Another source of calories is alcohol!  If you drink to excess, alcohol could lead you to become carefree 
              and ignore these precautions. 
               
              PERSONAL  HYGIENE 
              Many diseases are transmitted by what is known as the ‘faecal-oral’ route.  To help prevent this, always 
              wash your hands with soap and clean water after going to the toilet, before eating and before handling 
              food.  Using hand gel is another sensible option. 
                
              TRAVELLERS’  DIARRHOEA 
               
              This the most common illness that you will be exposed to abroad and there is NO vaccine against it.   
              Diarrhoea is caused by eating and/or drinking food and water contaminated by bacteria, viruses or 
              parasites.  Risk of illness is higher in some countries than others. 
               
              High risk areas include North Africa, sub-Saharan Africa, the Indian Subcontinent, S.E. Asia, South 
                                                                                                                       1 
                                                                     Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                                                                    High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
               
                America, Mexico and the Middle East. 
                 
                Medium risk areas include the northern Mediterranean, Canary Islands and the Caribbean Islands. 
                 
                Low risk areas include North America, Western Europe and Australia 
                 
                You can certainly help prevent travellers’ diarrhoea in the way you behave - make sure you follow the 
                food, water and personal hygiene guidelines already given. 
                 
                What is travellers’ diarrhoea? 
                Travellers’ diarrhoea is 3 or more loose stools in a 24 hour period often accompanied by stomach pain, 
                cramps and vomiting.  It usually lasts 2-4 days and whilst it is not a life threatening illness, it can disrupt 
                your trip for several days. The main danger of the illness is dehydration, and this, if very severe, can kill if 
                it is not treated.  Treatment is therefore rehydration.  In severe cases and particularly in young children 
                and the elderly, commercially prepared rehydration solution is extremely useful.   
                 
                Travel well prepared 
                A good tip is to take oral rehydration solutions with you.  These can be bought over the counter in a 
                chemist shop, available in tablet or sachet form — for example:  
                DIORALYTE or ELECTROLADE or DIORALYTE RELIEF.  (The latter is a formula containing rice powder 
                which also helps to relieve the diarrhoea, particularly useful in children).  Prepare according to 
                instructions.  Take care regarding their use in very small children and seek medical advice where 
                necessary.   
                 
                Anti diarrhoeal tablets can be used for adults but should NEVER be USED in children under 4 years of 
                age, and only on prescription for children aged 4 to 12 years.   
                Commonly used tablets are IMODIUM® and LOMOTIL® or NORMALOE®. 
                None of these tablets should ever be used if the person has a temperature or blood in the stool.   
                 
                Do contact medical help if the affected person has:- 
                  A temperature 
                  Blood in the diarrhoea 
                  Diarrhoea for more than 48 hours (or 24 hours in children) 
                  Becomes confused 
                 
                In some circumstances, antibiotics are used as a standby treatment for travellers’ diarrhoea.  Such 
                medication is not usually available on the NHS in anticipation of you being ill when away and needs to be 
                prescribed.  A woman taking the oral contraceptive pill may not have full contraceptive protection if she 
                has had diarrhoea and vomiting. Extra precautions must be used - refer to your ‘pill’ information leaflet. If 
                using condoms, take a supply of good quality ones with you which are CE approved. 
                 
                HEPATITIS B and HIV INFECTION  -  these diseases can be transmitted by  
                 
                   Blood transfusion   
                   Medical procedures with non sterile equipment   
                   Sharing of needles (e.g. tattooing, body piercing, acupuncture and drug abuse)   
                   Sexual contact — Sexually transmitted infections or STIs are also transmitted this way 
                 
                Ways to protect yourself 
                 
                  Only accept a blood transfusion when essential 
                  If travelling to a resource poor country, take a sterile medical kit  
                  Avoid procedures e.g. ear and body piercing, tattooing & acupuncture 
                                                                                                                                   2 
                                                                            Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                                                                             High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
                 
                  Avoid casual sex, especially without using  condoms  
                 
                Remember! Excessive alcohol can make you carefree and lead you to take risks you otherwise would not 
                consider. 
                INSECT  BITES 
                Mosquitoes, certain types of flies, ticks and bugs can cause many different diseases. e.g. malaria, dengue 
                fever, yellow fever.  Some bite at night, but some during daytime so protection is needed at all times. 
                 
                Avoid being bitten by: 
                   Covering up skin as much as possible if going out at night, (mosquitoes that transmit malaria bite 
                    from dusk until dawn). Wear loose fitting clothes, long sleeves, trousers or long skirts. 
                   Use insect repellents on exposed skin. (DEET containing products are the most effective.  A content of 
                    up to 50% DEET is recommended for tropical destinations). Clothes can be sprayed with repellents 
                    too or clothing specific sprays .g. permethrin. Check suitability for children on the individual products.  
                    If using sunscreen always apply first, followed by an insect repellent spray on top.   
                   If room is not air conditioned, but is screened, close shutters             early evening and spray room 
                    with knockdown insecticide spray. In malarious regions, if camping, or sleeping in unprotected 
                    accommodation, always sleep under a mosquito net (impregnated with permethrin).  Avoid camping 
                    near areas of stagnant water, these are common breeding areas for mosquitoes etc.   
                   Electric insecticide vaporisers are very effective as long as there are no power failures!  
                   There is no scientific evidence that electric buzzers, savoury yeast extract, tea tree oil, bath oils, 
                    garlic and vitamin B are effective. 
                   Homeopathic and herbal medications should NEVER be used as an alternative to conventional 
                    measures for malaria prevention.   
                 
                MALARIA 
                Malaria is a disease spread by mosquitoes, there is no vaccine yet available.  If you are travelling to a 
                malarious country, the travel adviser will have given you a separate leaflet with more details, please read 
                it.  Remember malaria is a serious and sometimes fatal disease.  If you develop flu like symptoms, 
                including fever, sweats, chills, feeling unwell, headaches, muscle pains, cough, diarrhoea – then seek 
                medical help immediately for advice and say you’ve been abroad.  This is VITAL, don’t delay.   
                Remember the ABCD of malaria prevention advice: 
                  
                       Awareness of the risk 
                       Bite prevention 
                       Chemoprophylaxis (taking the correct tablets) 
                       Diagnosis (knowing the symptoms and acting quickly) 
                 
                ANIMAL BITES 
                Rabies is present in many parts of the world.  If a person develops rabies, death is 100% certain.   
                 
                THERE ARE 3 RULES  REGARDING  RABIES 
                 
                1.  Do not touch any animal, even dogs and cats 
                2.  If you are licked on broken skin, scratched or bitten by an animal in a country which has rabies, wash 
                    the wound thoroughly with soap and running water for 10 - 15 minutes, then apply an antiseptic 
                    solution if possible e.g. iodine or alcohol.  Such precautions also apply if you are licked by the animal 
                    with their saliva coming into contact with your eyes or inside your mouth (essentially any mucous 
                    membranes) 
                3.  Seek medical advice IMMEDIATELY, even if you have been previously immunised, this is absolutely 
                    essential 
                                                                                                                                   3 
                                                                            Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                                                                             High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
                 
                   
                          
                         ACCIDENTS 
                         Major leading causes of death in travellers abroad are due to accidents, predominantly road traffic 
                         accidents and swimming/water accidents. You can help prevent them by following sensible precautions 
                          
                         PRECAUTIONARY  GUIDELINES 
                                  Avoid alcohol and food before swimming 
                                  Never dive into water where the depth is uncertain 
                                  Only swim in safe water, check currents, sharks, jellyfish etc. 
                                  Avoid alcohol when driving, especially at night 
                                  Avoid hiring motorcycles and mopeds 
                                  If hiring a car, rent a large one if possible, ensure the tyres, brakes and seat belts are in good 
                                        condition 
                                  Use reliable taxi firms, know where emergency facilities are  
                          
                         PERSONAL SAFETY AND SECURITY 
                         The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) provide excellent information about this.  They have 
                         information for many different types of travel and also advise on travel to specific destinations in times of 
                         political unrest and natural disasters.  Please go to their website for more information at 
                         https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/foreign-commonwealth-office  
                          
                         INSURANCE COVER 
                               Take out adequate insurance cover for your trip. This should possibly include medical repatriation as 
                                without it, this service is extremely expensive if needed.  
                               If you have any pre existing medical conditions, make sure you inform the insurance  
                                company of these details and check the small print of the policy thoroughly. 
                               If you travel to a European Union country, make sure you have obtained an EHIC card before you 
                                travel which takes some time to obtain.  Further information about the EHIC is found at 
                                http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/Healthcareabroad/EHIC/Pages/Applyingandrenewing.aspx 
                               Please note, additional travel insurance is still advised even if you have an EHIC card.  
                          
                         AIR TRAVEL 
                         It is sensible on any long haul flight to be comfortable in your seat.  Exercise your legs, feet and toes while 
                         sitting every half an hour or so and take short walks whenever feasible.  Upper body and breathing 
                         exercises can further improve circulation.  Drink plenty of water and be sensible about alcohol intake 
                         which in excess leads to dehydration.  Further information can be obtained from the websites detailed at 
                         the end of this leaflet with more specific advice and information on travel-related deep vein thrombosis.   
                          
                         SUN  AND  HEAT 
                         Sunburn and heat-stroke cause serious problems in travellers but in the long term can be a serious cause 
                         of skin cancer.  There is no such thing as a safe suntan, but the following advice should be taken:  
                          
                         PRECAUTIONARY GUIDELINES 
                               Increase sun exposure gradually, with a 20 minute limit initially.   
                               Use sun blocks which contain both UVA and UVB protection and sufficient sun protection factor (SPF) 
                                and a minimum of SPF 15.  Children under 3 years should have a minimum of SPF 25 and babies 
                                under 6 months should be kept out of the sun at all times.  Reapply often and always after swimming 
                                and washing.  Read manufacturer instructions 
                               Always apply sunscreen first followed by an insect repellent spray on top 
                               Wear protective clothing – sunhats, T shirts and sunglasses etc. 
                               Avoid going out between 11am - 3pm, when the sun’s rays are strongest 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4 
                                                                                                                           Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                                                                                                                                      High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
                          
                   Take special care of children and those with pale skin/red hair 
                   Drink extra fluids in a hot climate 
                   Be aware that alcohol can make you dehydrated 
                 
                                    For additional information sources, please see details overleaf 
                                                                         
                                                Have a good, but safe and healthy trip!   
                                                                           
                                                Examples of interesting website addresses: 
                                                                           
                                      Name/description                                               Web address  
                                                                                                              
                   Fit for Travel - Scottish NHS public travel site for general                              
                    advice on all aspects of travel and country specific                      www.fitfortravel.nhs.uk  
                    information, including malaria maps 
                     
                   NaTHNaC - National Travel Health Network and Centre                           www.nathnac.org  
                    England based, with similar information to above 
                     
                   NHS Choices  – look at travel health in the ‘A-Z’ section                                 
                    and also travel health in the ‘Live Well’ section (these                         www.nhs.uk  
                    are both different).  Excellent general website also.   
                     
                   FCO - Foreign & Commonwealth Office, especially useful                   www.gov.uk/government/ 
                    for safety and security and specific pages for types of           organisations/foreign-commonwealth-
                    travellers, e.g. gap year, responsible tourism.  Also look                           office 
                    at ‘Our Publications’                                                                        
                   Malaria Hotspots – general information for travellers             
                    providing information about malaria including a useful                  www.malariahotspots.co.uk  
                    podcast in  the ‘malaria travel tips’ section 
                     
                   Sunsmart - is the Cancer research website providing                                       
                    information about skin cancer and sun protection advice                     www.sunsmart.org.uk   
                                                                                                              
                   Travel health products to take away with you – these                      www.lifesystems.co.uk  
                    are just a small selection of many resources available.                   www.nomadtravel.co.uk 
                    Please note the Village Medical Centre is not endorsing                      www.safariquip.co.uk  
                    such items, merely providing information.                                  www.travelpharm.com  
                                                                                                              
                   Medex – Useful advice booklet on ‘travelling at high                         www.medex.org.uk  
                    altitude’  
                     
                   Medic Alert® - life-saving identification system for                       www.medicalert.org.uk  
                    individuals with hidden medical conditions and allergies 
                     
                   Kids Travel Doc™ - a paediatrician’s guide to travel and                  www.kidstraveldoc.com  
                    outdoor recreational activities 
                   Diabetes UK – information specific for those with                                         
                    diabetes who wish to travel – go to ‘Guide to diabetes’                     www.diabetes.org.uk  
                    then to the ‘living with diabetes’ section then go to 
                    ‘travel’ 
                     
                                                                                                                                   5 
                                                                            Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                                                                             High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
                 
                   Global travel clinic locator from the International                             www.istm.org  
                    Society of Travel Medicine 
                     
                   IAMAT – International Association for Medical                      www.iamat.org/doctors_clinics.cfm  
                    Assistance to Travellers (IAMAT)                                                          
                     
                   Google translate – Free online translation service                      http://translate.google.com  
                     
                 
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                   6 
                                                                            Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                                                                             High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
                 
                                                    
                                                      7 
                               Reproduced by kind permission of Jane Chiodini 2013 © 
                                      High Field Surgery Travel Advice 2016 
        
