     Procure to Pay 
     Perfect Invoice Guidelines 2017
     Unilever Nigeria Plc  
       Unilever Nigeria Plc 
       Invoicing Golden Rules 
    •  Commence work only once you have received a valid Purchase Order, at 
       Unilever we strictly adhere to ‘ NO PO NO PAY’ 
    •  Send compliant tax/commercial invoices that adheres to Unilever’s invoicing 
       requirements.  (Refer page 6 – Unilever Invoicing requirements). 
    •  Provide documentsto fully support your invoice claim.(Delivery Note/waybill 
       with PO is mandatory for Factory Deliveries, Job Completion form to be submitted 
       with all Service Invoices)
    •  Ensure that the bank account details including SWIFT and IBAN in case of 
       Foreign payments  are rightly mentioned on the invoice.
    •  Invoice should be Commercial/tax and not Proforma invoice, and should have 
       uniqueinvoice number.
    •  Ensure the Tax/Commercial invoice is in same currency as the PO is 
    •  Ensure you do not consolidate multiple Purchase Order lines into 1 line on 
       the invoice (Example, if the PO has service rate on line 1 and expenses on line 
       2 do not consolidate them as one entry on the invoice).
    •  Ensure additional costs like freight costsare clearly mentioned on Invoice in 
       separate line.
    •  Submit the invoice within 7 daysof delivery of the goods / service.(Note that 
       Payment terms will be effective from date of invoice submission and not Invoice 
       date)
    •  In case of change in your contacts/ Address/ Bank Detailsplease mark your 
       UL Requestor  in copy and send an email to our HELPDESK stating the 
       changed information.  This will enable us to change our records and does not 
       cause delay in Payment to your invoices.  (Refer page 5 for information on 
       Helpdesk)
    •  It is helpful to mention the name of the Unilever Requestor on the invoice.
    •  Ensure invoice print quality is reasonably good and readable.
    •  The invoice should be handed over in person only to the Bill to Address 
       mentioned on PO/DOor can be mailed over given Id’s on page 4 
       Note: Invoice failing to comply with all of above golden rules will be rejected 
                                                                                                   2
  Unilever Nigeria Plc 
  Invoicing Golden Rules 
  Important things to remember:
   If you have not received a valid Purchase Order (10 digit) number starting 
    with 45XXXXXXXX series PO or DOXXXXXXXXvia a system generated email,
    please inform your Unilever Requestor. Invoices without valid Purchase 
    Oder reference would be rejected.
   Only raise your invoice once you have the valid Purchase Order and have 
    successfully delivered the good/service (unless partial/staged  invoices  
    have been agreed). 
   The Tax / Commercial Invoice should correctly reflect Unilever PO/DO 
    number & Supplier Delivery Note Number (Mandatory for Goods, optional 
    for service which will expedite the pay process)
   For Tax Legislation VAT number for Unilever Nigeria Plc must appear on the 
    Tax Invoice  
    VAT NO : 4280240476
    Company Registration No : 1986/000431/07 
   Unilever follows strict No PO No Pay policywhich precludes us from paying 
    any invoice without a formal Purchase Order (PO/DO) issued for our 
    suppliers first.  
   Invoice date should be after the PO/ DO date.
   Please ensure any previously agreed changes to the PO are reflected in 
    your invoice.
   Indicate the Purchase Order on the front page of the invoice.  It may also be 
    referred to as Direct Order (DO) number.
   Credit Notes must reflect the Original Invoice number or the PO/DO 
    number in case of overstated invoices. (Exception would be  credit to be 
    availed on an agreement basis for a timely pay-out) 
   For Foreign Invoices amount will be paid to Bank details reflecting on 
    Invoice, as such ensure the details are updated and correct For Local 
    Vendors the invoices will be paid to bank account details updated in our 
    Vendor Master data. In case if there is any change to your bank accounts 
    please reach out to your UL Requestor with all supporting's and get the 
    details updated 
                                               2
  Invoice Submission 
    Once goods and services have been delivered to Unilever Nigeria,
    Supplier can choose any one of the below method to send the valid
    Tax/Commercial Invoice
    1. Via Physical Submission : The Invoice has to be handed over in
      Person by the Vendor at the security desk addressing it clearly to
      AccountPayableTeam
        ATTN : Accounts Payable Team 
        Unilever Nigeria Plc 
        1 Billings Way, Oregun 
    2. Via Mail : Send the Tax / Commercial Invoice soft copy to the 
        below mail address of the Accounts Payable team 
    APEnquiries.unilevernigeria@unilever.comwith a CC to below AP Contacts
             Ibrahim.Balogun@unilever.com   & 
             Opeyemi.Thomas@unilever.com
    Note : Supplier to choose only 1 method for sending invoices, please do not
    duplicate andsendinvoices.AlsoDeliveryNote/Waybillsareamustto attach
    along with Goods Invoices. The Job Completion form duly received from UL
    RequestermustbeaccompaniedwithallServiceInvoices.
    APPLICABLE ONLY FOR FOREIGN SUPPLIERS / FOREIGN CURRENCY 
    TAX INVOICES:  Adhere to all of the above compliant tax invoices 
    rules, and in addition:  
    1. For Goods Tax Invoices - ** All shipping documents, Customs
      documents along with tax / commercial invoice must be sent to
      yournominated person ( UL Requestor /Procurement agent ). The
      nominated person will then verify all the supporting's and invoice
      along with GR done and accordingly hand it over to Accounts
      Payable team for Scanning & Processing. In accordance with the
      Central Bank rules, no foreign invoice for goods will be paid unless
      completesupportingdocumentsare attached
    2. For Service Tax Invoice- All of the above compliant tax/
    commercial invoices rules to be adhered to. These invoices should
    also be accompanied withJobCompletionform duly received from the
    ULRequestor.                                                   2
                     Checking Your Invoice Status
          Tungsten Invoice Status Service, also known as Vendor Query Portalis 
          an online service that gives you full visibility of your invoice processing 
          and payment status, regardless of your invoice submission method. 
          The benefits of Vendor Query Portal  (VQP) include:
          •   Simple and fastregistration and login through the Tungsten Portal to 
              quickly see the status of your invoice .
          •   Invoice information availablefrom time of receipt through to final 
              payment. No need to call or email Unilever’s Helpdesk. 
          •   You have full controlover the frequency of the update
          •   Extensive exception managementfor your existing business 
              processes
          •   Tailored to your local languageand supported by local customer 
              service teams
          •   This functionality is Free of Charge –No Cost involved.
          Below is a link to a video that will aid to explain this functionality further:
          https://www.tungsten-network.com/uk/suppliers/get-invoice-status/
       Self-Registration for VQP:
       Click the link below to go to Unilever VQP welcome page. Click register or 
       Enroll now link on the page
       https://portal.tungsten-network.com/Forms/Ticket/NewSupportRequest.aspx
       •   If the registration is successful, choose to “Connect with your Customer” on 
           the Tungsten portal
       •   Else, if registration failed due to certain reasons such as “company name 
           already exists”, raise a service ticket in the portal under the section of “help 
           and support > 
       •   Contact us Link:
        http://www.tungsten-network.com/uk/help-support/contact-us/
       Helpdesk:
       For Procure to Pay related  queries, you may also contact the Unilever 
       helpdeskbelow:
       Country Purchase Order &                                 Accounts Payable & Ariba
                       Procurement Contact                      Contact Details 
       Nigeria         Finance.IP.NG@unilever.com Finance.AP.NG@unilever.com
                       Tel: +234-7080601746                    Tel: +234-7080601746
                                                                                                  3
                                 Unilever Invoicing Requirements:
          All Non-Compliant Invoices will be rejected for processing. To ensure compliance per our 
          requirements, please see below fields that should be present at the face of your invoice:
      Notes:
         •   Ensure the invoice is made out to the correct Unilever Business Unit and sent to the correct 
             invoicing address which is outlined in the Purchase Order.
         •   Ensure that the product/service you deliver matchesthe Purchase Order specifications 
             (quantity,  price, etc.)
         •   Ensure your invoice is in the same metrics & denomination as quoted on the Purchase Order.  
             Fore.g. If  the  order is in kg then the invoice should be in kg, if currency is EUR then the invoice 
             should be in EUR. 
         •   Please ensure any previously agreed changes to the Purchase Order are reflected in your 
             invoice. 
         •   If a credit note is required, please ensure it contains the necessary invoice & Purchase Order 
             number.                                                                                                          4
         Interpreting Unilever’s Purchase Order
                                         5
