                      EXTERNAL GUIDELINE FOR THE APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 62 
                                                 OF THE BELGIAN BANKING LAW 
                     
                     
                    TYPES OF ACCUMULATION RESTRICTIONS - STRUCTURE OF ARTICLE 62 
                     
                    The legal accumulation restrictions, as stated in Article 62 of the Law of 25 April 2014 on the legal 
                    status and supervision of credit institutions and stockbroking firms (hereinafter the "Banking Law"), 
                    can be divided into two categories, namely: 
                         >    qualitative restrictions: see Article 62, §4, §5, first sentence, and §6, first sentence, of the 
                              Banking Law; 
                         >    quantitative restrictions: see overarching principle in Article 62, §1, and further elaboration 
                              in Article 62, §5, second sentence, §6, second sentence, in conjunction with Article 62, §7 
                              and §9. 
                    According to Article 62, §3, of the Banking Law, all credit institution are required to develop an 
                    internal policy on external mandates. This policy may include both qualitative and quantitative 
                    provisions. 
                     
                    With respect to the (mixed) financial holding companies and third country branches, Articles 212 
                    and 335, 3°, of the Banking Law contain references to the aforementioned Article 62. 
                     
                     
                    SCOPE OF APPLICATION 
                     
                    The scope of application varies depending on whether the accumulation restrictions are qualitative 
                    or quantitative. Quantitative restrictions have a narrower scope of application than qualitative 
                    restrictions. The scope of each of these two categories will be further elucidated below on the basis 
                    of the following four criteria: 
                          1)  Which external mandates? 
                          2)  Within which entities? 
                          3)  Exercised by whom? 
                          4)  Significant or non-significant credit institution or (mixed) financial holding company? 
                     
                     
                    A.      QUALITATIVE RESTRICTIONS 
                          1)  external mandates as director or manager or participant in administration or policy-making, 
                              whether or not representing the credit institution or (mixed) financial holding company, 
                          2)  ... of a commercial company, a company having a commercial form, a company with 
                              another Belgian or foreign legal form or a Belgian or foreign public institution with industrial, 
                              commercial or financial activities 
                                  o  associations fall outside the scope of these restrictions; 
                                  o  "company" implies a motive of profit 
                          3)  ... exercised by members of the bodies of the credit institution or (mixed) financial holding 
                              company and any person who, under whatever name and in whatever capacity, participates 
                              in the administration or policy-making 
                          4)  ... regardless of whether the credit institution or the (mixed) financial holding company is 
                              significant. 
                                                           
                      B.       QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS 
                             1)  external mandates as director or manager or participant in administration or policy-making, 
                                 whether or not representing the credit institution or (mixed) financial holding company, 
                             2)  ... in commercial companies ... 
                             3)  ... exercised by members of the statutory governing body who are not members of the 
                                 management committee of the credit institution (Article 62, §5, of the Banking Law) and 
                                 members of the management committee or in the absence of a management committee, 
                                 the senior management of the credit institution, (mixed) financial holding company or third 
                                 country branch (Article 62, §6, Article 212 and Article 335, 3° of the Banking Law), except 
                                 for the mandates representing a Member State, 
                             4)  ...where the credit institution or the (mixed) financial holding company is significant. 
                       
                      Where a director within one and the same group both exercises a mandate in a significant institution 
                      (credit institution or (mixed) financial holding company) and in a non-significant institution (credit 
                      institution or (mixed) financial holding company), it may be that an accumulation of external 
                      mandates is not allowed from the first perspective because of the applicability of the quantitative 
                      restrictions of Article 62 of the Banking Law, but is allowed from the second perspective because 
                      the quantitative restrictions do not apply there. In that case, the strictest perspective shall apply to 
                      this person. 
                       
                       
                      QUALITATIVE RESTRICTIONS 
                       
                             x  The company representatives who are appointed on the recommendation of the credit 
                                  institution, must be members of the management committee of the institution or persons 
                                  designated by the management committee (Article 62, §4, of the Banking Law). 
                             x    The members of the statutory governing body who are not members of the management 
                                  committee of the credit institution can only be a director of a company in which the 
                                  institution holds a participating interest if they do not participate in the day-to-day 
                                  management of that company (Article 62, §5, 1st sentence, of the Banking Law). 
                             x  The members of the management committee or, in the absence of a management 
                                  committee, the persons participating in the senior management of the credit institution, 
                                  shall only carry a mandate that implies participation in the day-to-day management of 
                                  other companies in the limitative cases stated in the Law (Article 62, §6, 1st sentence, of 
                                  the Banking Law). 
                      The foregoing also applies to the (mixed) financial holding companies and third country branches 
                      (Articles 212 and 335, 3°, of the Banking Law). 
                       
                      These qualitative restrictions, as they appeared in the former Banking Law of 22 March 1993, were 
                      further specified in the External Mandates Circular of. 13/11/2006. 
                       
                       
                      QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS 
                       
                      A. BASIC RULES 
                           x   The Banking Law contains two quantitative limits: One executive and two non-executive 
                                mandates OR 4 non-executive mandates. 
                           x   However, these limits are not a right. As a prudential supervisor, the NBB may always 
                                require less mandates, following the principle of time commitment. 
                           x    All mandates held within the same group count as one. For the concrete interpretation of the 
                                term "group", see below. 
                           x   The NBB may, by way of derogation, allow one additional non-executive mandate. Should 
                                the institution wish to make use of this option, it must submit a documented file to the NBB. 
                                The NBB will analyse and assess this from the perspective of "time commitment". 
                            B. CONCEPT OF GROUP & PRIVILEGED COUNTING 
                             
                            For the purpose of the quantitative accumulation limits, the exercise of several mandates, whether 
                            or not involving participation in day-to-day management, in companies that are part of the group to 
                            which the credit institution belongs or of another group is considered as one single mandate (Article 
                            62, §9, first paragraph, of the Banking Law). The effect of this rule is simply referred to as 
                            "privileged counting " here. 
                                  a) Definition of "group" – starting point and scope 
                                     x     Article 62, § 9, second paragraph, of the Banking Law contains the definition of "group" for 
                                           the purposes of Article 62. A “group” is defined as a set of companies that consists of a 
                                           parent company, its subsidiaries, the companies in which the parent company or its 
                                           subsidiaries have a direct or indirect holding within the meaning of Article 3, 26°, of this 
                                           Law, as well as companies forming a consortium and the companies controlled by the 
                                           latter companies or in which the latter companies have a holding within the meaning of 
                                           Article 3, 26°, of this Law". 
                                     x     It can be concluded from the above definition that "group" may designate both a downward 
                                           constellation (starting from a parent company one looks down to its subsidiaries), and a 
                                           lateral constellation (in the case of a consortium). Both constellations also include the 
                                           holdings. 
                                     x     In the event of a downward constellation, the highest point of departure for the group to 
                                           which the credit institution itself belongs is the entity that is the starting point of the 
                                                                                                                     1 1
                                           prudential consolidated position at EEA-level .  For this, reference can be made to the 
                                           definitions contained in Article 164, §2, 3°, 4°, 6°, 7°, 9° and 10° of the Banking Law. 
                                     x     The scope in the event of a downward constellation is based on accounting consolidation. 
                                           The above definition of "group" after all contains a number of terms which are further 
                                           defined in Article 3, 26°, of the Banking Law, i.e. the terms "parent company", "subsidiary" 
                                           and "holding". This article also contains the definition of "control", which is required for the 
                                           terms "parent company" and "subsidiary". Finally, Article 3, 26°, of the Banking Law also 
                                           contains the definition of "affiliated companies", leading to the definition of "consortium". 
                                           There is a further referral to the general company law definitions contained in the 
                                           implementing decrees of Article 106, §1, of the Banking Law (Royal Decrees of 23 
                                           September 1992 on the annual accounts and consolidated annual accounts of credit 
                                           institutions). 
                                              
                                  b)     Types of groups that can benefit from privileged counting 
                                     x  Unlike in the past2, Article 62, §9, first paragraph of the Banking Law refers to all groups, 
                                           i.e. the group to which the credit institution belongs and other groups 
                                  c)     Method of counting 
                                     x     A single mandate that implies participation in the day-to-day management means that all 
                                           mandates which are exercised in companies or entities that are part of that group, are 
                                           indeed considered as one single mandate implying participation in the day-to-day 
                                           management3. In other words, if there is a combination of executive and non-executive 
                                           mandates, then the executive mandate outweighs the non-executive mandate. After all, an 
                                           executive mandate involves a greater time commitment. 
                                     x     It is possible that a director has recourse to several privileged countings from one single 
                                           perspective (i.e. viewed from one single credit institution). In that case, the various 
                                           privileged countings are considered separately, and are therefore not further reduced to 
                                           one mandate. 
                                   
                                   
                                  d)     Application at holding company level 
                             
                            1   See explanatory notes to the amendment to Article 62 of 21 March 2014. 
                            2    Article 62, §9, first paragraph, was amended by the Law of 18 December 2015. Prior to that date, its scope was limited to 
                                 the group to which the credit institution belongs and "groups a company of which has close links with the credit institution 
                            3    or its parent company". 
                                See explanatory notes to the amendment to Article 62 dd. 21 March 2014.  
                         
                         x    Article 212 of the Banking Law contains governance provisions that have a direct effect on 
                             the legal personality of the (mixed) financial holding company. As regards Article 62 of the 
                             Banking Law, Article 212 refers to: "62, §§1 to 4, §5, first sentence, and §§6 to 9, ...". The 
                             executive directors of such holding companies, to whom the accumulation restrictions apply 
                             (as opposed to the non-executive directors to whom the accumulation restrictions do not 
                             apply), can therefore also benefit from privileged counting if they exercise several mandates 
                             within the group. 
                             
                             
                    C.     ESTATE PLANNING COMPANIES 
                             
                         x    Only mandates in estate planning companies that qualify as commercial companies shall be 
                             taken into account. This is in line with Article 91, paragraph 5, of CRD IV, which states that 
                             managerial positions in organizations that do not primarily pursue commercial goals shall 
                             not be taken into account for applying quantitative accumulation restrictions (“zero 
                             counting”). The general company law principles apply: qualification as a commercial 
                             company depends on the object clause in the company's articles of association, analysed in 
                             light of the acts of commerce as stated in Article 2 of the Commercial Code. Moreover, 
                             Article 62, §9, last paragraph, of the Banking Law, explicitly refers to the Articles of 
                             Association. 
                         x   In this sense, estate planning companies whose purpose is limited to the regular 
                             management of family assets fall outside the scope of the quantitative accumulation 
                             restrictions. 
                         x   Institutions shall request all necessary information from their (prospective) directors so that 
                             they can verify whether the company where the external mandate is exercised is a 
                             commercial company. 
                              
                              
                    D.     MANAGEMENT COMPANIES 
                             
                         x   Principle of transparency (« look through »): a management company shall not be used to 
                             circumvent the counting of mandates in respect of a natural person. A mandate within a 
                             commercial management company must, for example, not be a cover for several mandates 
                             where the natural person acts as permanent representative of the management company. 
                         x   For the purposes of the quantitative restrictions of Article 62 of the Banking Law, the NBB 
                             will take into account all mandates where the natural person acts as permanent 
                             representative of a management company. 
                         x   The mandate in the management company itself, on the other hand, does not have to be 
                             counted, on the condition that the sole purpose of the management company is to exercise 
                             director mandates, this in order to avoid "double counting" of mandates. 
                              
                              
                    E.     THE EXCEPTION OF ONE ADDITIONAL NON-EXECUTIVE MANDATE 
                             
                         x   In individual cases, the supervisory authority may grant a derogation from the maximum 
                             number of mandates provided for in §§ 5 and 6 of Article 62 of the Banking Law, by allowing 
                             one additional mandate to be exercised that does not imply participation in the day-to-day 
                             management (Article 62, §7, of the Banking Law). 
                         x   The supervisory authority shall inform the European Banking Authority on a regular basis 
                             about the use it makes of the authority to derogate. 
                         x   The NBB will allow these derogations by way of exception and only if the institution/the 
                             person involved can motivate the derogation by making clear that sufficient time is available 
                             for the exercise of the mandate within the credit institution /the (mixed) financial holding 
                             company / the third country branch. 
