                                                  Table 3: TCAS II version 7.1 RAs and aural annunciations. 
                                                                                           Upward sense                                                                                                      Downward sense 
                                                                                     Required                                                                                                              Required 
                                                              RA                       vertical                                    Aural                                           RA                        vertical                                     Aural 
                                                                                           rate                                                                                                                  rate 
                                                                                      (ft/min.)                                                                                                             (ft/min.) 
                                                     Climb                          1500                         Climb, climb                                           Descend                           – 1500                        Descend, descend 
                                                     Crossing                                                    Climb, crossing climb;                                 Crossing                                                        Descend, crossing 
                                                     Climb                          1500                         climb, crossing climb                                  Descent                           – 1500                        descend; descend, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        crossing descend 
                                                     Maintain                       1500 to                      Maintain vertical                                      Maintain                          – 1500 to                     Maintain vertical 
                                                     Climb32                        4400                         speed, maintain                                        Descent32                         – 4400                        speed, maintain 
                                                     Maintain                       1500 to                      Maintain vertical                                      Maintain                          – 1500 to                     Maintain vertical 
                                                     Crossing                       4400                         speed, crossing                                        Crossing                          – 4400                        speed, crossing 
                                                                  32                                                                                                                      32
                                                     Climb                                                       maintain                                               Descent                                                         maintain 
                                                     Level Off                      0                            Level off, level off                                   Level Off                         0                             Level off, level off 
                                                     Reversal                                                    Climb, climb NOW;                                      Reversal                                                        Descend, descend 
                                                     Climb33                        1500                         climb, climb NOW                                       Descent33                         – 1500                        NOW; descend, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        descend NOW 
                                                     Increase                       2500                         Increase climb,                                        Increase                          – 2500                        Increase descent, 
                                                                  33                                                                                                                      33
                                                     Climb                                                       increase climb                                         Descent                                                         increase descent 
                                                     Preventive                     No                           Monitor vertical speed                                 Preventive                        No                            Monitor vertical 
                                                     RA                             change                                                                              RA                                change                        speed 
                                                     RA                             n/a                          Clear of conflict                                      RA                                n/a                           Clear of conflict 
                                                     Removed                                                                                                            Removed 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  32 This RA only occurs when the aircraft is already climbing or descending (in the correct vertical sense) at more than 
                                                  1500 ft/min. 
                                                   
                                                  33 Not possible as an initial RA. 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       37                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                                                  TCAS II SURVEILLANCE  
                                                  SURVEILLANCE FUNCTION  
                                                  The surveillance function enables a TCAS II equipped aircraft to interrogate surrounding Mode S and 
                                                  Mode A/C transponders. The requirement is to determine the relative positions and altitudes of the 
                                                  intruder aircraft. TCAS II can simultaneousyl track up to 30 aircraft, within a nominal range of 14 NM for 
                                                  Mode A/C targets and 30 NM for Mode S targets .In implementations that allow for the use of the 
                                                  Mode S extended squitter, the normal surveillance range may be increased beyond the nominal 14 NM. 
                                                  However, this information is not used for collision avoidance purposes. The equipment is not intended 
                                                  to interrogate a target unless the altitude information indicates that it is within 10,00ee0 tf of own 
                                                  altitude. 
                                                   
                                                  Own aircraft will use the air data computer (which typically reports own altitude in 1-foot increments) as 
                                                  the source of altitude for own TCAS II calculations. For intruders the altitude used will be in 25-foot 
                                                  increments (when available) for Mode S equipped aircraft or 100-foot increments for Mode A/C. 
                                                   
                                                  Intruders fitted with Mode S transponders 
                                                  TCAS II surveillance of Mode S equipped aircraft is based on the selective address feature of the ModeS  
                                                  transponder. TCAS II listens for the spontaneous transmissions (squitters) sent once per secoy nd b
                                                  Mode S transponders. The individual Mode S 2-b4it address of the sender is contained within the 
                                                  squitter. If another aircraft has the same 24-bit address as own aircraft34, the track will be ignored.  
                                                   
                                                  Following receipt of a squitter, TCAS II sends a Mode S interrogation to the Mode S24  -bit address 
                                                  contained in the message. TCAS II uses the reply received to determine range, bearing and altitude of 
                                                  the intruder aircraft. 
                                                   
                                                  If the aircraft is equipped with a Mode S transponder but does not provide altituinfdoerm  ation this 
                                                  aircraft will be tracked as a non-altitude reporting target (NAR) using range and bearing information and 
                                                  it will be shown on the TCAS traffic display, when own aircraft is below FL155. Neither a data tag nor a 
                                                  trend arrow will be shown with the traffic symbol for an intruder that is not reporting altitude. TAs will 
                                                  be generated against non-altitude reporting aircraft when the range test for TA generation is satisfied 
                                                  (but using reduced time thresholds which correspond to RA thresholds). TAs will be generated against 
                                                  non-altitude reporting aircraft when the range test for TA generation is satisfied. Non-altitude reporting 
                                                  aircraft are deemed to be at the same altitude as own aircraft (i.e. the worst case scenario).  
                                                   
                                                  TCAS II tracks the range, bearing, and altitude of each Mode S aircraft within cover. This data is provided 
                                                  to the collision avoidance logic to determine the requirement for TAs or RAs. 
                                                   
                                                  Intruders fitted with Mode A transponders 
                                                  Aircraft equipped with only Mode A transponders are not tracked nor detected by TCAS II because 
                                                  TCAS II does not use Mode A interrogations.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  34 Whilst that should not occur (as Mode S 2-4bits addresses are assigned to individual airframes), reports suggest 
                                                  that there are cases of aircraft operating with an incorrect 24-bit address programmed into the transponder. 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    38                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                         Intruders fitted with Mode A/C transponders 
                         TCAS II uses a modified Mode C interrogation to interrogate Mode A/C transponders. This interrogation 
                         is known as the Mode C only all-call.  
                          
                         If the intruder aircraft is equipped with a Mode A/C transponder but does not provide altitude 
                         information (Mode C) this aircraft will be tracked as a non-altitude reporting target using range and 
                         bearing information and it will be shown on TCAS traffic display, when own aircraft is below FL155. 
                         Neither a data tag nor a trend arrow will be shown with the traffic symbol for an intruder that is not 
                         reporting altitude. TAs will be generated against non-altitude reporting aircraft when the range test for 
                         TA generation is satisfied. Non-altitude reporting aircraft are deemed to be at the same altitude as own 
                         aircraft (i.e. the worst case scenario).  
                          
                         The replies from Mode A/C transponders are tracked in range, bearing and altitude. This data is provided 
                         to the collision avoidance logic to determine the requirement for TAs or RAs. 
                          
                         Synchronous and non-synchronous garbling problems, and grounrefd-lected replies, make it more 
                         complicated for TCAS II to monitor Mode A/C equipped aircraft than those equipped with Mode S 
                         transponders. 
                          
                         When a Mode C only allc-all interrogation is sent by TCAS, all Mode A/C transponders, which receive it, 
                         reply. Due to the duration of the reply, all Mode A/C equipped aircraft, at a similar range from the TCAS 
                         aircraft, can produce replies which overlap when received by the TCAS aircraft. This is described as 
                         synchronous garble. 
                          
                         Various techniques are employed to reduce this phenomenon: 
                             Algorithms allow the reliable decryption of up to three overlapping replies. 
                             The combined use of a sequence of interrogations of variable power and suppression pulses permit 
                              the reduction of the number of transponders replying to any individual interrogation. This 
                              technique, known as whisper-shout, takes advantage of differences between the receiver sensitivity 
                              of transponders and the transponder antenna gains of intruder aircraft. 
                             Another technique for reducing synchronous garble is the use of directional transmissions, which 
                              reduces the number of potential overlapping replies. However, slightly overlapping coverage must 
                              be provided to ensure 360-degree coverage. 
                          
                         Non-synchronous garble is caused by the receipt of undesired transponder replies, which follow an 
                         interrogation sent by a surveillance radar or another TCAS. These replies, called FRUIT (False Replies from 
                         Unsynchronised Interrogator Transmissions) are transitory. They are identified and discarded by reply-to-
                         reply correlation algorithms. The probability that a surveillance track based on FRUIT replies will be 
                         started and maintained is extremely low. 
                          
                         Avoiding the initiation of surveillance tracks based on mult-ipath replies is an aspect of TCAS II design. 
                         The multi-path effect is caused by the reflection of an interrogation by flat ground, which produces 
                         more than one reply, t othe interrogation, coming from the same aircraft. The reflected rplye is of 
                         a lower intensity. To control this effect, the direc-tpath power level is used; it determines the minimum 
                         triggering level of the TCAS II receiver. This technique, called DMTL (Dynamic Minimum Triggering 
                         Level) discards these delayed and weaker signals. 
                                                                  
                         ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                39                                      EUROCONTROL 
                          
                                                  INTERFERENCE LIMITING  
                                                  The surveillance function contains a mechanism limiting electromagnetic interference in the 
                                                  1030/1090 MHz band. Each TCA ISI unit is designed to limit its own transmissions. TCAS II is able to 
                                                  count the number of TCAS units, within cover, due to the broadcast, every 8 seconds, of a TCAS presence 
                                                  message, which contains the Mode S 24bit-  address of the sender. As the number of TCAS units 
                                                  increases above a certain level, the number and the power of the interrogations are reduced. 
                                                   
                                                  Additionally, in dense traffic areas at altitudes lower than FL180, the rate of interrogation, usually 1 per 
                                                  second, becomes 1 per 5 seconds for intruders considered non-threatening and at least 3 NM from own 
                                                  aircraft, and which would not trigger an advisory in the next 60 seconds. This mechanism is called 
                                                  “reduced surveillance”. 
                                                   
                                                  These interference limiting techniques aim to avoid transponder overload due to high levels of its own 
                                                  TCAS interrogation and replies to interrogations from other TCAS aircraft. The result, in very high-density 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                  airspaces, is that the TCAS surveillance range might be reduced to as little as 5 NM.
                                                  HYBRID SURVEILLANCE  
                                                  Hybrid surveillance is a method that decreases the number of Mode S surveillance interrogations made 
                                                  by an aircraft's TCAS II unit. This feature, new to TCAveS rsII ion 7.1, may be included as optional 
                                                  functionality in TCAS II units.  
                                                   
                                                  TCAS II units equipped with hybrid surveillance use passive surveillance instead of active surveillance to 
                                                  track intruders that meet validation criteria and are not projected to be nea-rterm collision threats. With 
                                                  active surveillance, TCAS II transmits interrogations to the intruder's transponder and the transponder 
                                                  replies provide range, bearing, and altitude for the intruder. With passive surveillance, position data 
                                                  provided by an on-board navigation source is broadcast from the intruder's Mode S transponder. The 
                                                  position data is typically based on GNS Sand received on own aircraft by the use of Mode S extended 
                                                  squitter, i.e. 1090 MHz ABD, aS-lso known as 1090ES. Standards for Hybrid Surveillance have been 
                                                  published in RTCA DO-300. 
                                                   
                                                  The intent of hybrid surveillance is to reduce the TCAS II interrogation rate through the judicious use of 
                                                  validated ADS-B data provided via the Mode S extended squitter without any degradation of the safety 
                                                  and effectiveness of TCAS II. 
                                                   
                                                  Active interrogations are used to track any intruder which is perceived to be a threat (see Figure 12). 
                                                   
                                                        NNoot tot to s sccaallee
                                                                                                                                Increasing collision potential 
                                                                                                                                Increasing collision potential 
                                                          OOwwnn ai airrcrcrafaftt               RARA               TATA                                                                                                                         TThhrreateat
                                                         AActctiivve sure survveieillllanceance                                  PPassiassivve sure survveieillllanceance                            PPassiassivve sure survveieillllanceance
                                                         IInntrtruuddeerr i iss a a n neeaarr th thrreeaat it inn b boothth      IInntrtruuddeerr i iss a a n neeaarr th thrreeaat it inn            IInntrtruuddeerr i iss n noot at a n neeaarr th thrreeaat.t.  
                                                         alalttiittuudde ane andd r ranangge.e.  TTCCAASS  actactiive ve         aalltititutuddee o orr r raannggee.. I Inntrtruuddeerr              IInntrtruuddeerr  vvaalliiddaatetedd w wiithth T TCCAASS  
                                                         iinnteterrrrooggaatitioonn e evveerryy s seeccoonndd..                  vvalaliiddatateded w wiitthh T TCCAASS  actactiive ve               aacctitivvee i innteterrrrooggaatitioonn o onnccee  ppeerr  
                                                                                                                                 iinnttererrrooggatatiioonn o onnce evce evereryy 10 sec. 10 sec.    mmiinnuutete..
                                                  Figure 12: Hybrid surveillance - transition from passive to active surveillance. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                     40                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                   TCAS II LOGIC AND ADVISORIES  
                   THE COLLISION AVOIDANCE LOGIC 
                   Concepts 
                   The collision avoidance logic, or CAS (Collision Avoidance System) logic is based on two basic concepts: 
                   the sensitivity level and the warning time. Although the CAS parameters are strictly defined, the 
                   complexity of collision avoidance logic makes prediction of exact behaviour in real-time difficult. 
                    
                   The sensitivity level is a function of the altitude and defines the level of protection. Sensitivity is greater 
                   (i.e. the warning time is greater) at higher altitude. The warning time is mainly based on the estimated 
                   time-to-go (and not distance-to-go) to the Closest Point of Approach (CPA). The warning time allows for 
                   additional range protection in case of low closure rates. 
                    
                   Sensitivity levels 
                   A trade-off is needed between the protection that the CAS logic must provide and the unnecessary 
                   alarms linked to the predictive nature of the logic. This balance is achieved by controlling the Sensitivity 
                   Level (SL), which adjusts the dimensions of a theoretical “protected volume” (Figsueere  13  and 
                   Figure 14) around each TCAS equipped aircraft. The sensitivity level depends on the altitude of own 
                   aircraft and varies from 1 to 7 (see Table 4). The greater the SL, the more protection is provided. The SL is 
                   also coordinated with each intruder, with the higher of the two SLs applying to both aircraft; however, 
                   ALIM (the threshold for corrective RAs – see Table 6) is determined solely by each aircraft’s own altitude. 
                   If one of the two aircraft is in SL2 (TA-only mode), it will remain in SL2 regardless of the SL of the intruder. 
                   See page 47 for more information about threat detection.  
                    
                   Typically, the following selections of TCAS/transponde rmodes of operations on the transponder panel 
                   are availabl e(Figure  15):  “STAND-BY”,  “ALT-OFF”,  “XPNDR”,  “TA-ONLY”,  and  “AUTOMATIC”  or 
                   “TA/RA”. Note: some implementation may not have the“ ALT-REPTG-OFF” selection. The modes of 
                   TCAS/transponder operations are explained in Table 5. 
                    
                                                 
                   ACAS GUIDE December 2017                 41                            EUROCONTROL 
                    
                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                               CCoollisllisioionn a arreeaa        
                                                                 CCaauutitioonn a arreeaa                                       WWararnniinngg ar areaea
                                                                 TTA 2A 200--48 sec.48 sec.                                     RRA 1A 155--35 sec.35 sec.
                                                                 NNoot tot to s sccaallee
                                                    Figure 13: TCAS II protected volume (horizontal view). 
                                                     
                                                        NNoot tot to s sccaallee
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CCoollisllisioionn a arreeaa
                                                                                                                            WWararnniinngg ar areaea
                                                                                                                            RRA 1A 155--35 sec.35 sec.
                                                     CCaauutitioonn a arreeaa
                                                     TTA 2A 200--48 sec.48 sec.
                                                    Figure 14: TCAS II protected volume (vertical view). 
                                                     
                                                     
                                                                                                                                        
                                                     Figure 15: Example of TCAS/transponder panel (Boeing 737-700). 
                                                    EUROCONTROL                                                                                                          42                                                    ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                     
                         The CAS logic converts the modes into sensitivity levels as follows: 
                             When  “STAND-BY”  mode is selected by the pilot, the TCAS equipment does not transmit 
                              interrogations. Normally, this mode is used when the aircraft is on the ground or when there is 
                              a system malfunction. SL1 is assumed. 
                             In “TA-ONLY” mode, the TCAS equipment performs the surveillance function. However, only TAs 
                              are provided. The equipment does not provide any RAs. A “TA-only” aircraft will be treated by other 
                              TCAS aircraft as unequipped. SL2 is assumed. 
                             When the pilot selects “AUTOMATIC” or “TA/RA” mode, TCAS automatically selects theSL   based 
                              on the current altitude of own aircraft. SL2 is selected when the TCAS aircraft is between 0 and 
                              1000 feet AGL (Above Ground Level) as indicated by the radar (radio) altimeter. This SL corresponds 
                              to “TA-ONLY” mode. In SLs 3 through 7, TAs and RAs are provided. To determine the sensitivity 
                              level required above 2600 feet AGL, the logic uses the standard pressure altitude (altimeter setting 
                              1013.25 hPa) indicated by the barometric altimeter. Table 4 provides the altitude threshold at which 
                              TCAS automatically changes SL and the associated SL for that altitude band. 
                               
                          
                         Table 4: Sensitivity levels. 
                                  Own Altitude                 Sensitivity levels (SL) 
                           Stand-by mode                                   1 
                           0 – 1000 ft AGL                                 2 
                           1000 – 2350 ft AGL                              3 
                           2350 ft AGL – FL50                              4 
                           FL50 – FL100                                    5 
                           FL100 – FL200                                   6 
                           Above FL200                                     7 
                          
                          
                         Warning times 
                         TCAS II operates on relatively short time scales. The nominal maximum generation time fAo isr a T 
                         48 seconds before the CPA. For an RA the time is 35 seconds. The time scales are shorter at lower 
                         altitudes. Unexpected or sudden aircraft manoeuvres may cause an RA to be generated with much less 
                         lead time. It is even possible that an RA will not be preceded by a TA if a threat is imminent. See page 47 
                         for more information about threat detection. 
                          
                                                                  
                         ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                43                                      EUROCONTROL 
                          
                                                                           CAS FUNCTIONS 
                                                                           In normal operation, the CAS logic works on a 1-second cycle. The CAS logic functions used to perform 
                                                                           the  collision avoidance task are shown in Figure 16. The following description provides a general 
                                                                           understanding of these functions. There are many other parameters, notably those relating to the 
                                                                           encounter geometry, that are beyond the scope of this document. 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                      SSSuuurrrvvveeeillaillaillannnccceee
                                                                                                          OOOwwwnnn ai ai airrrcrcrcrafafafttt                                             TTTrrrackiackiackinnnggg                                                       TTTararargggetetet
                                                                                                                                                                                             TTTrrrafafaffffiiic c c 
                                                                                                                                                                                           adadadvvviiisososorrryyy
                                                                                                             RRRanananggge te te testestest                                                                                                                        AAAllltitititttuuudddeee te te tesssttt
                                                                                                                                                                                             TTThhhrrreateateat   
                                                                                                             HHHooorrriiizzzooonnntatatalll                                               dddeeeteteteccctititiooonnn
                                                                                                                fffiltiltilteeerrrinininggg
                                                                                                                  SSSenenense se se                                                     RRReeesssooollluuutititiooonnn                                                  SSStrtrtreeennngggththth
                                                                                                             selselselectectectiiiooonnn                                                    adadadvvviiisososorrryyy                                                     selselselectectectiiiooonnn
                                                                                                                  GGGrrrooouuunnnddd                                                      CCCooommmmmmsss & & &                                                             OOOthththeeerrr
                                                                                                                   ssstatatatititiooonnn                                               cccoooooorrrdddiiinnnaaatititiooonnn                                               aiaiairrrcrcrcrafafafttt
                                                                                                                                                                                          AAAdddvvviiisssooorrryyy
                                                                                                                                                                                     aaannnnnnuuunnnccciiiaaatititiooonnn
                                                                           Figure 16: CAS logic functions. 
                                                                            
                                                                           A complete description of TCA II veS                                                                                                   rsio n7.1 logic can be found in the TC II MAS OPS (Minimum 
                                                                           Operational Performance Standards) published by RTCA in the USA (docume-n185Bt DO) and by 
                                                                           EUROCAE in Europe (document ED-143). 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                           EUROCONTROL                                                                                                                                                             44                                                                           ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                                            
                            Table 5: Transponder modes of operations. 
                                                                                        RAs generated 
                                                         Trans-                              against 
                              Operating mode            ponder           TCAS                                             Mode of operation 
                                                                                        Own        Intruder 
                                                                                       aircraft 
                              Stand-by (STBY)              Off             Off            No           No       Own aicrraft invisible to both ATC 
                                                                                                                radars/surveillance and other TCAS II 
                                                                                                                equipped aircraft. 
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                To be used at the gate only or 
                                                                                                                while taxiing in and out. 
                              XPNDR                        On              Off            No           Yes      Own aircraft visible to ATC 
                                                                                                                radars/surveillance and other TCAS II 
                                                                                                                equipped aircraft. Uncodoinrated 
                                                                                                                RAs can be generated by intruders. 
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                Departure: Select XPNDR  during 
                                                                                                                push-back. 
                                                                                                                Arrival: Select XPNDR  once the 
                                                                                                                runway has been vacated. 
                              ALT RPTG OFF                 On,             Off            No           No       Own aircraft visible to ATC 
                                                      no altitude                                               radars/surveillance without altitud e
                                                       reporting                                                and other TCAS II equipped aircraft 
                                                                                                                but no RAs can be generated. 
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                Should be selected if requested 
                                                                                                                by ATC (if altitude reports are 
                                                                                                                incorrect) and in other 
                                                                                                                circumstances as per Operations 
                                                                                                                Manual. 
                              TA-Only                      On              On             No           Yes      Own TCAS II can generate TAs only.  
                                                                       (TA-only)                                Other TCAS II aircraft can generate 
                                                                                                                (uncoordinated) RAs. A “-oTnlAy” 
                                                                                                                aircraft     will be treated as 
                                                                                                                unequipped by other TCAS II aircraft. 
                                                                                                                This will allow them full freedom to 
                                                                                                                choose the most effective RA.  
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                Use limited to the situations 
                                                                                                                described in the  Operations 
                                                                                                                Manual, such as engine failure, 
                                                                                                                emergency descent and other 
                                                                                                                specific conditions. 
                              TA/RA                        On              On            Yes           Yes      Own aircraft can generate  RAs.
                              or                                                                                RAs with other TCAS II aircraft are 
                              AUTOMATIC                                                                         coordinated. 
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                Standard mode of operation. 
                             
                                                                         
                            ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                      45                                           EUROCONTROL 
                             
                                                  Tracking 
                                                  Using the surveillance reports (slant range, bearing35 and altitude) provided each second (every five 
                                                  seconds in case of “reduced surveillance”), the CAS logic computes the closure rate of each target within 
                                                  surveillance range, in order to estimate the time in seconds to CPA, and the horizontal miss distance at 
                                                  CPA.  
                                                   
                                                  In the case of Mode C equipped intruders, their replies are correlated with known tracks (or a new track 
                                                  is initiated) using altitude (1-0fo0ot quantisation) and smoothed through the tracker . MFodore S 
                                                  equipped aircraft, their replies are correlated with tracks using aircraft address and altitude- (foot25 or 
                                                  100-foot quantisation, depending on the generation of the equipment) and smoothed through the 
                                                  tracker. The 25-foot altitude reporting results in better tracking and thus more effective RAs.  
                                                   
                                                  If the target aircraft is equipped with an al-ticotuddinge  transponder, the CAS logic calculates the 
                                                  altitude of the target at CPA. The intruder’s verticralate   is obtained by measuring the time it takes to 
                                                  cross successive 100-foot or 25-foot altitude increments, which depends upon the type of altitude 
                                                  coding transponder. The bearing of the intruder is estimated through the use of the directional antenna.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            36 and radar (radio) 
                                                  The CAS logic uses the data from own aircraft pesrsure altimeter (1-foot precision)
                                                  altimeter at lower altitudes. In this way, it determines own aircraft altitude, vertical rate, and the relative 
                                                  altitude and altitude rate of each target.  
                                                   
                                                  The outputs from the tracking algorithm (target range, horizontal miss distance at CPA, closure rate, 
                                                  relative altitude and relative altitude rate of the target aircraft) are supplied to the collision avoidance 
                                                  algorithms. 
                                                   
                                                  When the aircraft is below 1700 feet (±50 feet) AGL, the CAS logic estimates the altitude of the intruder 
                                                  above the ground, using own pressure altitude, own radar (radio) altimeter and the pressure altitude of 
                                                  the intruder. If this estimated altitude is less than 380ee f t (±20 feet), TCAS II considers the target to be 
                                                  on the ground, and so does not generate any TA or RA (see Figure 17). Hysteresis values ensure that the 
                                                  on-the-ground/airborne status does not oscillate rapidly should the aircraft be close to the nominal 
                                                  height boundary but periodically passing above and below that boundary. Mode S aircraft that declare 
                                                  that they are on the ground are not tracked by TCAS II. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                  Figure 17: Target on-the-ground determination. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  35 Bearing is not used when generating an alert: it is used only to display positions on the traffic display and, where 
                                                  possible, to suppress nuisance alerts through the operation of the miss distance filter (see Threaette Dction on 
                                                  page 47). 
                                                   
                                                  36 Some older airframes use own Mode C altitude (100-foot precision). 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    46                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                  Closest Point of Approach 
                                                  The Closest Point of Approach (CPA) is defined as the instant at which the slant range between own 
                                                  TCAS II equipped aircraft and the intruder is at a minimum. Range at the CPA is the smallest range 
                                                  between the two aircraft. 
                                                   
                                                  In its predictions, TCAS II assumes the wor-scat se scenario, ie. . the aircraft are on a collision course, to 
                                                  estimate the time remaining until CPA. If the aircraft are indeed on a collision course then the estimate is 
                                                  accurate and the resulting RA will provide advice on how best to avoid an imminent collision. Otherwsie 
                                                  – the aircraft are not on a collision course – the estimate is too large and that can lead to unnecessary 
                                                  RAs. From the collision avoidance perspective that does not matter because there is no risk of collision; 
                                                  however an unnecessary RA can be disruptive for both flight crew and ATC.  
                                                   
                                                  Threat detection 
                                                  In collision avoidance, tim-eto-go to the CPA, rather tha dnistance-to-go to the CPA, is used. In its 
                                                  simplest form time-to-go to the CPA is calculated by dividing the slant range, between aircraft, by te h
                                                  closure rate. 
                                                   
                                                  The warning time, or tau (τ), is a threshold in TCAS’s threat detection logic with which time-to-go to the 
                                                  CPA is compared. 
                                                   
                                                  In order to detect threats, the TCAS II logic performs a Range Test a nsdubsequently, if the Range Test 
                                                  passes,  an  Altitude Test on every altitud-ereporting target on each cyc le(i.e. approximately every 
                                                  second). An intruder becomes a threat only if the following conditions are met in the same cycle:  
                                                           both the range and altitude tests pass; or 
                                                           the range test passes and an altitude-crossing Resolution Advisory Complement (RAC)37 has been 
                                                            received from the threat. 
                                                   
                                                  Range Test. The Range Test passes if the aircraft are currently close in range, or are projected to be 
                                                  close in range within the time threshold ta: “cu lose in range” effectively means within a distance 
                                                  parameter called DMOD38. The test is achieved by performing a single calculation of a modified time-to-
                                                  go to the CPA. The modified time-to-go to the CPA is calculated by first decrementing the slant range 
                                                  by the parameter DMOD before dividing by the closure rate. This effectively provides a test on current 
                                                  range as well as a test on the ti-tom-ego to the CPA. The test on current range is made in order to 
                                                  provide an alert in those situations when a threat would otherwise come very close in range without 
                                                  triggering a TA or RA (due to a slow closure encounter geometry). 
                                                   
                                                  In order to limit the number of operationally unnecessary RAs where the estimated horizontal miss 
                                                  distance (HMD, i.e. horizontal range, projected at CAP) is sufficient to render a collision avoidance 
                                                  manoeuvre unnecessary, refinements to the Range and Altitude Tests are included in the logic. 
                                                   
                                                  The Range Test uses a Miss Distance FilterM (DF) which is applied to suppress RAs if a reliable estimate 
                                                  of HMD is larger than the threshold DMOD. The MDF continually checks whether own aircraft or the 
                                                  threat aircraft manoeuvres, and if a manoeuvre is detected the HMD estimate is declared unreliable and 
                                                  the MDF is not used. Incidentally, this is the only case when the relative bearing of other aircraft is used 
                                                  in the collision avoidance logic. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  37 See page 49 for more information on Resolution Advisory Complement. 
                                                   
                                                  38 Distance Modification or DMOD is a safety factor incorporated in range measurements to account for possible 
                                                  accelerations by the intruder. The value of distance modification varies with the sensitivity level (in line with the 
                                                  time thresholds). 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       47                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                      Altitude Test. The Altitude Test is performed only when the Range Test pass. eFsor the altitude test, 
                      separate calculations are performed to determine whether the aircraft are currently close in altitudei. (e. 
                      vertically separated by less than a threshold ZTHR) or are projected to be at the same altitude within 
                      a given time threshold. 
                       
                      The Altitude Test includes a Variable Vertical Threshold. Generally the time threshold in the Altitude Test 
                      is the time threshold tau. However, a reduced time threshold, the Time to Co-altitude Threshold (TVTHR), 
                      is used when own aircraft is deemed to be in level flight (i.e. vertic alrate less than 600 ft/min.) or it is 
                      climbing or descending in the same sense as the intruder, but more slowly. The reduced time threshold 
                      allows time for any lev-eloff manoeuvre by the intruder aircraft to be detected (which reduces the 
                      incidence of nuisance RAs) and also tends to result in any RA firstate bd ieingn g  ener
                      a climbing/descending aircraft – rather than in the level aircraft (which is likely to reduce the incidence 
                      of altitude crossing RAs being selected). 
                       
                      Threat Declaration. If both Range Test and Altitude Test pass then the intruder is declared a threat and 
                      an RA is generate dA. n intruder becomes a threat when it penetrates a “protected volume” (see 
                      Figure 13 and Figure 14) enclosing own aircraft. The “protected volume” is defined by means of a Range 
                      Test (using range data only) and an Altitude Test (using altitude and range data). Application of these 
                      tests delivers a positive or a negative result (implying that the threat is inside or outside the appropriate 
                      part of the protected volume). 
                       
                      The tau, DMOD, TVTHR, and ZTHR values are a function of the Sensitivity LevelSL () and are shown in 
                      Table 6. A further parameter, ALIM, (used when selecting the RA strength and direction: see below) is 
                      a function of altitude and is also shown in Table 6. 
                       
                      Generally, for a conflict geometry with a low vertical closure rate, the vertical triggering thresholds for 
                      RAs range from 600 to 800fee t, depending on the altitude of own aircraft. For a high vertical closure 
                      rate, an RA is triggered as soon as the estimated time to the moment when the threat and the own 
                      aircraft will be at co-altitude is lower than the appropriate tau value (see Table 6). 
                       
                      Depending on the geometry of the encounter, and the quality of the vertical track data, an RA may be 
                      delayed or not selected at all. 
                       
                      RAs cannot be generated for non-altitude reporting threats. 
                       
                      Table 6: Alert thresholds related to altitude. 
                                                       tau values      TVTHR     DMOD values         ZTHR (feet)     ALIM 
                          Own Altitude         SL         (sec)         (sec)        (NM)          Alt. Threshold    (feet) 
                                                       TA      RA       RA        TA       RA       TA       RA        RA 
                       0 – 1000 ft AGL          2      20     no RA    no RA     0.30     no RA     850     no RA    no RA 
                       1000 – 2350 ft AGL       3      25       15       15      0.33      0.20     850      600      300 
                       2350 ft AGL – FL50       4      30       20       18      0.48      0.35     850      600      300 
                       FL50 – FL100             5      40       25       20      0.75      0.55     850      600      350 
                       FL100 – FL200            6      45       30       22      1.00      0.80     850      600      400 
                       FL200 – FL420            7      48       35       25      1.30      1.10     850      700      600 
                       Above FL420              7      48       35       25      1.30      1.10    1200      800      700 
                       
                                                          
                      EUROCONTROL                                      48                    ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                       
                                                  TCAS II ALERTS 
                                                  TRAFFIC ADVISORY 
                                                  The traffic advisory function uses a simplified algorithm, similar to the RA generation logic but with 
                                                  greater alert thresholds (see Table 6). The vertical triggering thresholds for TAs are 850 feet above and 
                                                  below the TCAS equipped aircraft below FL420 and 1200 feet above FL420.  
                                                   
                                                  A non-altitude reporting target will trigger the generation of a TA if the range test is satisf iaendd  own 
                                                  aircraft is below FL155, on the basis of the same tau values associated with the RA (in SL2 where no RAs 
                                                  are issued the SL3 threshold of 15 seconds is used).  
                                                   
                                                  If an intruder is not the cause of a TA, but is located within 6 NM and ±1200 feet of the TCAS equipped 
                                                  aircraft, it will be displayed as proximate traffic. 
                                                   
                                                  TCAS-TCAS COORDINATION 
                                                  In a TCAS-TCAS encounter (i.e. an encounter between two TCAS II equipped aircraft), each aircraft, once 
                                                  an RA has been issued, transmits ‘interrogations’ to the other aircraft via the Mode S data link in the form 
                                                  of a Resolution Advisory Complement (RAC). The receiving aircraft notes the RAC interrogation but does 
                                                  not reply. RACs are sent in order to ensure the selection of complementary resolution advisories by 
                                                  restricting the choice of manoeuvres available to the TCAS II receiving the RAC. Coordination 
                                                  interrogations use the same 1030/1090 MHz channels as surveillance interrogations and are transmitted 
                                                  at least once per second by each aircraft for the duration of the RA. Each aircraft continues to transmit 
                                                  coordination interrogations to the other as long as the other is considered a threat (i.e. an RA is active). 
                                                   
                                                  Coordination interrogations contain information about an aircraft’s intended manoeuvre with respect to 
                                                  the threat. This information is expressed in the form of a complement: e.g. if one aircraft has selected 
                                                  an “upward-sense” advisory, it will transmit a message to the threat, restricting the threat’s selection of 
                                                  RAs to those in the “downward-sense”. The coordination interrogation also contains information as to 
                                                                                                                                                                                      39. After coordinatign, each TCAS II unit 
                                                  whether the threat has selected a crossing RA or not
                                                  independently selects the RA’s strength in relation to the conflict geometry. 
                                                   
                                                  The basic rule for sense selection in a TCAS-TCAS encounter is that before selecting a sense, each TCAS 
                                                  must check whether it has received a complement from the threat indicating that threat’s intentio. Inf 
                                                  this is so, TCAS complies with the threat aircraft expectations. If not, TCAS selects the sense, which best 
                                                  fits the encounter geometry. 
                                                   
                                                  In the vast majority of cases, the two aircraft see each other as threats at slightly different moments in 
                                                  time. Coordination proceeds as follows: the first aircraft selects the RA sense, based on the encounter 
                                                  geometry, and transmits its intent; the second aircraft then selects the opposite sense and confirms its 
                                                  complementary intent. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  39 Only Crossing Descend, Crossing Climb and Crossing Maintain Vertical Speed RAs annunciations contain the word 
                                                  “crossing”. In some geometries other RAs may require that own aircraft crosses at least 100 feet below or above the 
                                                  threat aircraft (e.g. Level Off RA). 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       49                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                        Occasionally, the two aircraft may happen to simultaneously see each other as a threat and, 
                        consequently, both select a sense based on the encounter geometry. In this case, there is a chance that 
                        both will select the same sense. For the purpose of coordination, the aircraft with the lower Mode S 24-
                        bit address (so called “master aircraft”) is given priority in coordination over the aircraft with the higher 
                        Mode S 24-bit address (so called “slave aircraft”). The aircraft with the higher Mode S 24-bit address 
                        (“slave aircraft”) will detect the incompatibility of the RA and will reverse the sense of its RA to the sense 
                        opposite to the RA generated by the other aircraf(i.et . coordination or tiebreak reversal.) The aircraft 
                        with the lower Mode S 24-bit address (“master aircraft”) is not permitted to reverse its RA for the purpose 
                        of coordination. The reversal can occur on the cycle after the initial RA has been is sFuored m. ore 
                        information on reversals see page 53. 
                        RESOLUTION ADVISORY 
                        Advisory selection 
                        When a threat is declared, a two-step process is used to select an appropriate RA: 
                         
                        Sense selection. The first step is to select the sense (upward or downward avoidance) of the RA. Using 
                        the results of the vertical and hrizoontal tracking, the logic models the intruder’s path to the CPA. 
                        Figure 18 shows the paths that would result if own aircraft climbed or descended at 1500 ft/min. taking 
                        into account a standard pilot response (reaction time o f5 seconds and vertical acceleration of ¼ g). The 
                        CAS logic computes the predicted vertical separation for each of the two cases and normally selects the 
                        sense, which provides the greater vertical distance. 
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                                                  B
                                                                  B
                         
                                                                  AA
                         
                         
                          ALALIIMM A>A>BB  →→ ddoowwnnwwarardd R RAA  selselectecteded
                         
                                                            CPCPAA
                        Figure 18: RA sense selection. 
                         
                        In the cases where an altitude crossing is projected before the CPA, the CAS logic will pick the sense that 
                        avoids crossing, provided that the resulting vertical distance at CPA is sufficient.  
                         
                        Figure 19 illustrates this case. The desired amount of vertical safe distanceA (LIM), varies from 300 to 
                        700 feet, depending on own aircraft’s altitude regime. If ALIM cannot be achieved, a crossing RA will be 
                        issued (see Figure 20). However, delaying mechanisms aim at reducing the incidence of crossing RAs by 
                        deferring an altitude crossing advisory if: 
                           one aircraft is level, or when the two aircraft have vertical rates in opposite senses and they are 
                            separated by at least 600 feet; or  
                           when both aircraft have a vertical rate in the same sense and they are separated by at least 850 feet. 
                         
                        A resolution advisory is altitude crossing if own ACAS aircraft is currently at least 100 feet below or above 
                        the threat aircraft for upward or downward sense advisories, respectively.                                        
                        EUROCONTROL                                         50                      ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                         
                                           BB
                                           AA
                 ALALIIMM A=A=BB  →→ uuppwwaarrdd R RAA  sseelleecctetedd to to  
                 pprreevveennt t aalltititutuddee c crroossssiinngg
                                        CPCPAA
                Figure 19: Non-crossing RA. 
                 
                                            BB
                                            AA
                 UUppwwaarrdd R RAA w woouulldd n noot st saattiissfyfy th thee  
                 AALLIIM,M, alalttiittuudde cre croossissinngg R RAA  selselectecteded
                                         CPCPAA
                Figure 20: Crossing RA. 
                 
                 
                                          
                ACAS GUIDE December 2017            51                       EUROCONTROL 
                 
           Strength selection. In the second step the strength of the RA is chosen. The strength is the degree of 
           restriction placed on the flight path either by limiting the currentve rtical rate or requiring a modified 
           vertical rate. TCAS II is designed to select the RA strength that is the least disruptive to the existing flight 
           path, while still providing ALIM feet of separatoni  (see  Figure 21, in which the verticalr ate limit of 
           0 ft/min. would be selected as the lowest strength RA which achieves ALIM separation).  
            
                                                  
           Figure 21: RA strength selection. 
            
           The Adjust Vertical Speed RA in version 7.0 required a reduction of the vertical rate to 0, 500, 1000 or 
           2000 ft/min. In version 7.1 the “Adjust vertical speed, adjust” RA has been replaced with a new “Level off, 
           level off” RA. The “Level off, level off” RA requires a reduction of vertical rate to 0 ft/min. (see also section 
           on version 7.1 on page 15). The vertical rate reduction to 0 ft/min. is sometimes stronger than needed; 
           however, this change was made to make the intention of the vertical rate limitation, unambiguous and 
           more intuitive (i.e. a move toward level flight).  
            
           In order to reduce the frequency of initial RAs that reverse the existing vertical rate of own aircraft, when 
           two TCAS equipped aircraft are converging vertic awllyith opposite rates and are currently well 
           separated in altitude, TCAS II will first issue an RA limiting the vertical rate(i.e.  “Level off, level off”) to 
           reinforce the pilots’ likely intention to level off at adjacent standard flight levels. If no ronsespe to this 
           initial RA is detected, or if either aircraft accelerates vertically toward the other aircraft, the initial RA will 
           strengthen as required.  
            
           After the initial RA is selected, the CAS logic continuously monitors the vertical separation that wll bie 
           provided at CPA and if necessary, the initial RA will be modified (see section below). 
            
           Advisories and associated climb/descent rates for version 7.1 are listed in in Table 3. 
            
            
           Subsequent advisories 
           During the course of the encounter, the RA strength is evaluated every second. Occasionally, the threat 
           aircraft will manoeuvre vertically in a manner that thwarts the effectiveness of the issued RA. In these 
           cases, the initial RA will be modified to either increase the strength or reverse the sense of the initial RA 
           (when the initially issued RA is no longer predicted to provide sufficient vertical spacing).  
            
           For increase and reversal RAs, the vertical speed change should be started within 2½ seconds of the RA 
           being displayed . The change in vertical speed should be accomplished with an acceleration of 
           approximately / g.  
             
           EUROCONTROL           52         ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
            
                                         Strengthening  RAs. An RA limiting the vertical rate (i.e. Monitor Vertical Speed or Level Off RAs) is 
                                         strengthened by changing to a more restrictive vertical rate limit. This more restrictive RA can be a 
                                         Climb or Descend RA (required vertical rate 1500 ft/min.), or it can be a Maintain Vertical Speed or 
                                         Crossing Maintain Vertical Speed (required vertical rate is the current vertical rate which is in excessf  o
                                         1500 ft/min.). 
                                          
                                         A positive RA (i.e. Climb, Descend, Maintain Vertical Speed or Crossing Maintain Vertical SpeedRA  s) is 
                                         strengthened to an Increase Climb or Increase Descent RA (required increase of vertical rate from at 
                                         least 1500 to 2500 ft/min.).  
                                          
                                         Figure 22 shows an encounter where it is necessary to increase the descent rate from the 1500 ft/min. 
                                         required by the initial Descend RA to 2500 ft/min. (i.e. Increase Descent RA). 
                                                         ““DDescenescendd,,  
                                                       ddescenescendd”” RARA                                InInititiaial pl prroojejeccttioionn
                                                                                                                     TThhrreateat i inncrcreaseaseses
                                                                                                                     ddescenescentt r ratatee
                                                             ““IInncrcrease ease 
                                                           ddescenescentt”” RARA
                                                                                                     CPCPAA
                                         Figure 22: Increase vertical rate RA. 
                                          
                                         Reversal RAs .A reversal of RA sense i spermitted in coordinated encounters (i.e. both aircraft TCAS II 
                                         equipped) and in encounters with non-TCAS equipped threats. Figure 23 shows an encounter where an 
                                         initial Climb RA requires reversal to a Descend RA after the threat aircraft manoeuvres. 
                                          
                                         Version 7.1 incorporates a new reversal logic that detects “vertical chase with low vertical miss distance” 
                                         geometries, i.e. two aircraft converging in altitud eremain within 100 fet e(see Figure 3). This type of 
                                         scenario can occur when one aircraft is not following the RA or is not TCAS II equipped and follows an 
                                         ATC instruction or performs an avoidance manoeuvre based on visual acsiqtiuon (i                                                                              see section on 
                                         version 7.1 on page 15). 
                                                                                                          
                                         ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                  53                                                               EUROCONTROL 
                                          
                                                   
                                                  Two types of reversals may occur: 
                                                           Coordination (tiebreak) reversal – occurs when two aircraft simultaneously declare each other as 
                                                            a threat and happen to both select the same RA sense. Should this occur, the aircraft with the 
                                                            higher Mode S 24-bit address (“slave aircraf”)t  will detect the incompatibility and will reverse the 
                                                            sense of its RA to the sense opposite to the RA generated by the other aircraft T. he aircraft with the 
                                                            lower Mode S 24b-it address (“master aircraft”) is not permitted to reverse its RA for the purpose of 
                                                            coordination. 
                                                           Geometric reversal – can occur when one or other of the aircraft in an encounter manoeuvres, or 
                                                            fails to manoeuvre, in such a way as to negate the effectiveness of the RA. TCAS II equipped aircraft 
                                                            continuously monitor the progress of the encounter, and the effectiveness of the RA, and can 
                                                            reverse the sense of the RA in these circumstances. In encounters between two TCAS II equipped 
                                                            aircraft the reversal in RA sense will be coordinated (i.e. transmitted to the other aircraft, which will 
                                                                                                                                              40. Only one geometric reversal is permitted in an encounter .
                                                            also reverse the sense of its own RA)
                                                            Geometric reversal can still occur even if there was previously a coordination (tiebreak) reversal. 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  40 Normally, the aircraft with higher Mode S 2-4bit address (“slave aircraft”) will detect the incompatibility and will 
                                                  reverse the sense of its RA, with the exception of “vertical chase with low vertical miss distance” geometrie s(see 
                                                  page 17), where a special parameter is used to circumvent the Mode S address priority rule. 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    54                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                                        ““CClimlimbb, , 
                                                                     cclimlimbb”” RARA
                                                                                                                                        Actual path
                                                                                                                                        Actual path
                                                                                                                                      InInititiaial pl prroojejeccttioionn
                                                                                      ““DDescenescendd,,  
                                                                              ddescenescendd N NOOWW”” RARA
                                                                                                                          CPCPAA
                                                  Figure 23: Sense reversal RA. 
                                                   
                                                  Weakening RAs. During an RA, if the CAS logic determines that the response to an RA has provided the 
                                                  vertical distance equal or greater to ALIM prior to CPA (i.e. the aircraft have become safely separated in 
                                                  altitude while not yet safely separated in range), the initial RA will be weakened to a “Level off, level off” 
                                                  RA (see Figure 24). This is done to minimise unnecessary deviations from the original altitude. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                  Figure 24: Weakening RAs. 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                  RA duration 
                                                  Collision avoidance logic sets the minimum time limits on RA duration as follows: 
                                                           Minimum RA duration (initial RA to Clear of Conflict) – 5 seconds; 
                                                           Minimum time before a reversal RA can be issued – 5 seconds41; 
                                                           Minimum time before weakening RA can be issued – 10 seconds. 
                                                                       
                                                  A strengthening RA can be issued without any delay. 
                                                   
                                                  Multi-threat logic 
                                                  TCAS II is able to handle multi-threat situations either by attempting to resolve the situation with a 
                                                  single RA (i.e. pass above all threat aircraft or pass below all threat aircraft) which will maintain safe 
                                                  vertical distance from each of the threat aircraft, or by selecting an RA that is a composite of -non
                                                  contradictory climb and descend restrictions (i.e. requiring own aircraft to pass below some aircraft and 
                                                  pass above others). 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  41 Geometric reversals only: coordination (tiebreaker) reversals can be issued without any delay. 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       55                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                      It is possible that the RA selected in such encounters may not provide ALIM separation from all intruders. 
                      An initial multi-threat RA can be any of the initial RAs shown in Table 3 or a combination of upward and 
                      downward sense RAs. The example in Figure 25 shows a multi-threat RA (one threat above, one threat 
                      below) which will be anonunced “Level off, level off”. The m-utlhtireat logic is designed to utilise 
                      increase rate RAs and reversals RAs to best resolve multi-threat encounters. 
                       
                      Figure 25: IVSI example showing a multi-threat 
                       
                      encounter. 
                       
                       
                      RA termination 
                      The intruder ceases to be a threat when the range between the TCAS II aircraft a threndat aircraft 
                      increases (i.e. the range test fails) or when the logic considers that the horizontal distance at CPA will be 
                      sufficient.  If these conditions are m etthe resolution advisory is cancelled and a “Clear of conflict” 
                      annunciation is issued. The pilot then is required to return to the originacl learance, unless otherwise 
                      instructed by ATC. 
                       
                      When the tracking of the threat has been lost, an RA will be removed and terminated but no "Clear of 
                      conflict" annunciation made. 
                       
                      RA inhibition 
                      The CAS logic may inhibit a Climb or Increase Climb RA in some cases due to aircraft climb performance 
                      limitations at high altitudes, or when the aircraft is in the landing configuration. These limitations are 
                      known by the logic, which will then choose a viable alternative RA. The limitations are set beforehand by 
                      the certification authorities according to the type of aircraft. 
                       
                      For all aircraft, pre-defined limitations apply at lower altitudes to prevent RAs in proximity to the ground 
                      (see  Table  7  and  Figure 26). RAs are inhibited based on radar (radiao)lti meter reported heights. 
                      Hysteresis values of +100 feet (for climbing aircraft) and –100 feet (for descending aircraft) ensure that 
                      the inhibition state does not oscillate rapidly should the aircraft be flying close to the nominal altitude 
                      boundary but periodically passing above and below that boundary (e.g. when flying over hilly terrain). 
                       
                       
                      Table 7: TCAS alert generation inhibitions. 
                        Alert type                       Alert inhibited below 
                        Increase Descent RA              1550 ft (±100 ft) AGL 
                        Descend RA                       1100 ft (±100 ft) AGL 
                        All RAs                          1000 ft (±100 ft) AGL 
                        All TCAS aural alerts            500 ft (±100 ft) AGL 
                      Note: +100 ft values are used for climbing aircraft, –100 ft for descending aircraft. 
                      EUROCONTROL                                      56                     ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                       
                                                                                                                       
                        Figure 26: Illustration of TCAS alert generation inhibitions. 
                         
                        Moreover, when a GPWS (Ground Proximity Warning System), TAWS (Terrain Avoidancaend   Warning 
                        System) or wind shear detection warning have been activated, TCSA will automatically be placed into 
                        TA-only mode and TAa ural annunciation is suppressed. TCAS will remain i-n TonlyA mode for 
                        10 seconds after the GPWS/TAWS or wind shear warning is removed. During this 10 second suppression 
                        period, the TA aural annunciation is not suppressed. 
                         
                        If there is no valid radar (radio) altimeter input, TCAS will set the ground  l–1e00,vel000 f as eet. 
                        Consequently, none of the inhibits that are activated by proximity to the ground will be set. 
                         
                        TCAS-TCAS encounters 
                        In approximately half of encounters  between two TCAS II equipped airc, raafnt RA will onlbye  
                        generated by one of the aircraft while the other may or may not receive a TA. For example, in 1000-foot 
                        level off encounters, the aircraft that is climbing or descending towards another aircraft in a level flight is 
                        more likely to generate an RA first. If the RA is promptly responded to, the aircraft in level flight will not 
                        receive an RA (unless the vertical rate is very high).  
                         
                        Self-tracking RAs 
                        In rare cases, an RA can be tggeri   red as a result of sel-ftracking, i.e. when an aircraft tracks itself as an 
                        intruder. The pseudo-intruder is then seen at the same altitude and same position as own aircraft. 
                        Although TCAS II will not track intruders whose Mode S 24-bit address is the same as own aircrafta nd 
                        aircraft’s suppression bus should prevent  own transponder replying to interrogations, failures may 
                        occasionally occur.  
                         
                        Self-tracking RAs may be operationally disruptive as the pilots would follow these RAs not knowing that 
                        they result from a failure and cause large deviations from ATC clearances. 
                         
                        Advisory aural annunciation 
                        The CAS logic sets the flags, which control the aural annunciations and the display of information. All 
                        aural annunciations for version 7.1 are listed in Table3 . All aural annunciations are inhibited below 
                        500 feet (±100 feet) AGL or when GPWS or TAWS or wind shear detection warnings are active. 
                         
                        Air-ground communications 
                        RA Report. Using the Mode S data link, TCAS II can downlink RA Reports to Mode S ground sensors. This 
                        information is provided in the Mode S transponder’s 1090 MHz response to an interrogation from 
                        a Mode S ground sensor requesting information (see Figure 27). 
                         
                        ACAS GUIDE December 2017                              57                                     EUROCONTROL 
                         
                                                                   RA Broadcast Messag eTC. AS II  also provides an RA Broadcast Message that is transmitted 
                                                                   automatically on 1030 MHz. The RA Broadcast Message is intended for 1030 MHz receivers on the 
                                                                   ground. This broadcast is provided for the first time when an RA is initially displayed to the flighrtew c  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    42. The final RA Broadcast Message is sent on RA 
                                                                   and is rebroadcast once a second or every 8 seconds
                                                                   termination.  
                                                                    
                                                                   For 18 seconds after the termination of the RA (“Clear of conflict” message), both the RA Report and RA 
                                                                   Broadcast Message contain an RA terminated indicator (RAT), indicating that the RA is no longer being 
                                                                   displayed to the pilot. 
                                                                    
                                                                   The air/ground communication messages allow RA activity to be detected on the ground for the 
                                                                   purpose of RA monitoring or ATC operations (i.e. RA downlink display to controllers)43.  
                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               One TCAS equipped
                                                                                                                                       RARA                1 sec.1 sec.           2 sec.2 sec.          3 sec.3 sec.          4 sec.4 sec.          5 sec.5 sec.          6 sec.6 sec.           7 sec.7 sec.          8 sec.8 sec.              ……
                                                                   RRAA C Coooorrddiinnaatitioonn  
                                                                   IInnteterrrrooggaatitioonn  11003300 M MHHzz
                                                                   RRAA B Brrooadadcastcast  
                                                                   1090 M1090 MHHzz
                                                                   RRAA R Reeppoorrtt                                                                                                            OOnn e eaacchh g grroouunndd  MMooddee S S r raaddaarr i innteterrrrooggaatitioonn
                                                                   1090 M1090 MHHzz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Both TCAS equipped
                                                                                                                                       RRA A              1 sec.1 sec.           2 sec.2 sec.          3 sec.3 sec.           4 sec.4 sec.          5 sec.5 sec.          6 sec.6 sec.           7 sec.7 sec.          8 sec.8 sec.              ……
                                                                   RRAA C Coooorrddiinnaatitioonn  
                                                                   IInnteterrrrooggaatitioonn  11003300 M MHHzz
                                                                   RRespespoonnse se 1090 M1090 MHHzz
                                                                   RRAA B Brrooadadcastcast  
                                                                   1090 M1090 MHHzz
                                                                   RRAA R Reeppoorrtt                                                                                                            OOnn e eaacchh g grroouunndd  MMooddee S S r raaddaarr i innteterrrrooggaatitioonn
                                                                   1090 M1090 MHHzz
                                                                   Figure 27: Air ground communications timeline. 
                                                                   PERFORMANCE MONITORING 
                                                                   TCAS II software continuously and automatically monitors its own health and performance. The 
                                                                   performance monitoring operates whenever power is applied to TCAS. In addition, the performance 
                                                                   monitor includes a pilot-initiated test feature that includes expanded tests of TCAS displays and aural 
                                                                   annunciations. The performance monitor supports expanded maintenance diagnostics that are 
                                                                   available to maintenance personnel while the aircraft is on the ground. 
                                                                    
                                                                   The performance monitor validates many of the inputs received from other aircraft systems and 
                                                                   validates the performance of the TCAS processor, for example own aircraft pressure altitude input or the 
                                                                   connection of TCAS to the aircraft suppression bus. 
                                                                    
                                                                   When the performance monitor detects anomalous performance within TCAS or an invalid input from 
                                                                   a required on-board system, the failure is enunciated to the pilot.  
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                   42 A change to TCAS II MOPS was made in 2013 to increase the frequency of rebroadcast to once every second from 
                                                                   once every 8 seconds. As there has been no requirement to retrofit, newer equipment should transmit the RA 
                                                                   Broadcast more frequently, while older will continue to transmit every 8 seconds. 
                                                                    
                                                                   43 RA downlink display to controllers is a concept implemented only by a small number of ANSPs. ICAO has not 
                                                                   published any provisions for operations of RA downlink. 
                                                                    
                                                                   EUROCONTROL                                                                                                                                          58                                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                                    
                      TCAS II OPERATIONS 
                      INDEPENDENT SYSTEM 
                      TCAS II works independently of the aircraft navigation, flight management systems, and ATC ground 
                      systems. While assessing threats it does not take into account the ATC clearance, pilot’s intentions nor 
                      flight management systems inputs. 
                       
                      LIMITATIONS 
                      As TCAS II depends on the signals from the other aircraft transponders in order to assess the threat, it 
                      will not detect any non-transponder equipped aircraft, nor aircraft with an inoperative transponder. As 
                      altitude of the threat aircraft is required in order to issue an RA, RAs will not be generated against traffic 
                      without an altitude reporting transponder.  
                       
                      The level of protection offered by TCAS II depending on the threat type is shown in Table8 . An RA can 
                      be generated against any aircraft equipped with an altitude reporting transponder (Mode S or 
                      Mode A/C). The intruder does not need to be fitted with TCAS II. However, RAs are coordinated only 
                      between TCAS II equipped aircraft. In the majority of cases only one aircraft will receive an RA (regardless 
                      of whether the threat is equipped or not). 
                       
                      Table 8: TCAS II levels of protection. 
                                  Threat aircraft equipment                          Own aircraft (TCAS II) 
                        No transponder                                  Not detected 
                        Mode A transponder only                         Not detected 
                        Mode A/C transponder with no altitude reports   TA, intruder shown on TCAS traffic display 
                                                                        without altitude  
                        Mode C or Mode S transponder                    TA and RA  
                        TCAS I                                          TA and RA  
                        TCAS II                                         TA and coordinated RA  
                       
                      TCAS II will automatically fail if the input from the aircarft’s barometric altimeter or transponder is lost. If 
                      there is no valid radar (radio) altimeter input, TCAS will continue to function but is constrained to 
                      operate in SL3 or above. Additionally, none of the inhibits that are activated by proximity to the ground 
                      (see page 56) will be set. 
                       
                      TCAS II surveillance was designed to provide sufficient surveillance range for protection against aircraft 
                      with relative closing speeds of up to: 
                          500 kts when operating in transponde-requipped aircraft densities of 0.3 aircraft per square NM; 
                           and  
                          1200 kts in densities of 0.06 aircraft per square NM. 
                       
                      Furthermore, TCAS II will neither display nor issue alerts (RAs or TAs) against aircraft having vertical rates 
                      in excess of 10,000 ft/min. 
                                                          
                      ACAS GUIDE December 2017                         59                                  EUROCONTROL 
                       
                                                  TCAS II will generate position reports on Mode C and Mode S targets that are within ±300ee0 ft and 
                                                  whenever possible within ±10,000 feet of the own aircraft. 
                                                   
                                                  RAs can be generated before ATC separation minima are violated and even when ATC separation 
                                                  minima will not be violated. In Europe, for about two-third of all RAs the ATC separation minima are not 
                                                  violated.  
                                                   
                                                  MINIMUM EQUIPMENT LIST 
                                                  A  Minimum Equipment List (MEL) is a list which provides for the operation of aircraft, subject to 
                                                  specified conditions, with aprticular equipment inoperative. MEL provisions may also allow for 
                                                  operations with TCAS II out of service.  
                                                   
                                                  The circumstances are under which that is allowed vary. In most of the cases in Europe an aircraft may 
                                                  operate under the MEL provisions with TCAS II inoperative for up to 10 calendar days. However,n  i
                                                  German airspace the time period during which TCAS II may be inoperative is reduced to 3 days.  
                                                   
                                                  National regulators may impose more restrictive deadlines for some operators or parts of airspace. As 
                                                  these  provisions are subject to chang  at se                                                           hort notice, the Reader is advised toefe rr to current 
                                                  regulation for up-to-date information. 
                                                   
                                                  SAFETY BENEFITS 
                                                  The safety benefits delivered by TCAS II are usually expressed in terms of the risk ratio: a comparisonf  o
                                                  the risk with and without TCAS (i.e. does TCAS II make safety better or worse?) – a risk ratio of 0% would 
                                                  indicate an ideal system (the risk is eliminated) and a risk of 100% would indicate an ineffective system 
                                                  (the risk is unaltered). Real systems heav a performance somewhere between these extremes. It is 
                                                  important to remember that risk ratio is a relative measure expressing the improvement in safety rather 
                                                  than the absolute level of safety.  
                                                   
                                                  Furthermore, while discussing TCAS II safety benefits, it is not sufficient to demonstrate that TCAS II will 
                                                  prevent collisions that might occur in its absence. The risk that collision avoidance logic could induce a 
                                                  collision in otherwise safe circumstances must also be considered .Moreover, some other failures could 
                                                  cause TCAS II to induce a collision, e.g. an RA directing the aircraft into the flight path of an undetected 
                                                  third party aircraft. 
                                                   
                                                  Two types of collision risks influence the overall risk ratio:  
                                                           unresolved risk of collision – a situation in which TCAS II resolution fails to resolve the collision; 
                                                           induced risk of collision – a situation in which there is no risk of collision and the TCAS II resolution 
                                                            creates it. 
                                                   
                                                  For Europe, TCAS II is estimated to reduce the risk of midair collision by a factor of about 5 (i.e. a risk ratio 
                                                  of approximately 22%)44. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  44 The EUROCONTROL ACASA Project computed, for both the CVSM and the RVSM environments the full system 
                                                  ratio of 21.7% and 21.5% respectively. Source: ACAS Safety Study: Safety Benefit of ACAS II Phase 1 and Phase 2 in the 
                                                  New European Airspace Environment, ACAS/02-022, May 2002.  
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    60                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                  All other things being equal the higher the level of aircraft equipage with TCAS II and the better the 
                                                  level of pilot compliance with RAs the greater the reduction in ris kT.he most important single factor 
                                                  affecting the performance of TCAS II is the response of pilots to RAs .At any time, regardless of the level 
                                                  of ACAS equipage by other aircraft, the risk of collision for a specific aircraft can be reduced by a factor 
                                                  greater than three by fitting TCAS II45.  
                                                   
                                                  The operational evaluation of TCAS II performance using monitoring data and several large scale safety 
                                                  studies has demonstrated that it provides an overall improvement in flight safety .In many cases, RAs 
                                                  have prevented near mid-air collisions and mid-air collisions from taking place. However, it must be 
                                                  stressed that TCAS II cannot resolve every near mid-air collision and may induce a near mid-air collision if 
                                                  certain combinations of events occur. 
                                                   
                                                  Finally, although TCAS II significantly improves ft slighafety, it cannot entirely eliminate all risks of 
                                                  collision and it might itself induce a risk of collision. 
                                                   
                                                  ALTITUDE SOURCE 
                                                  When feasible, pilots should use the same altitude data source used by the Pilot Flying to provide 
                                                  altitude information to TCASI a Ind the ATC transponders. Using a common altitude source limits 
                                                  unnecessary RAs due to differences between altitude data sources. 
                                                   
                                                  TRAFFIC ADVISORIES 
                                                  The objective of a TA is to aid visual acquisition of an intruder and prepare the crew for a possible.  RA
                                                  TAs are nominally generated 20 to 48 seconds prior to CPA or 10 to 13 seconds before RA, although 
                                                  shorter generation times are possible in some geometries. In some geometries an RA may occur 
                                                  without a preceding TA on one or both of the involved aircraft .The majority of TAs are not followed by 
                                                  RAs.  
                                                   
                                                  No manoeuvres shall be made in response to a TA and TAs are not required to be reported to ATC. 
                                                   
                                                  A TA is announced as “Traffic, traffic” and the intruder aircraft symbol on the traffic displays changes to 
                                                  a yellow or amber solid circle.  
                                                   
                                                  Pilots should respond to TAs by attempting to establish visual contact with the intruder and other 
                                                  aircraft that may be in the vicinity. Pilots should not deviate from an assigned clearance based only on 
                                                  TA information nor make horizontal manoeuvres based solely on information shown on the traffic 
                                                  display. 
                                                   
                                                  RESOLUTION ADVISORIES 
                                                  Pilot actions 
                                                  The objective of an RA is to achieve a safe vertical distance from a threat aircraft (between 300 and 
                                                  700 feet  –  altitude dependent). RAs are nominally generated 15 to 35 seconds prior to the CPA, 
                                                  although shorter generation times are possible in some geometries.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  45 Source:  EUROCONTROL ACASA Project, Final Report on Studies on the Safety of ACAS II in E, uWProp-1.e8/210D, 
                                                  March 2002. 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       61                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 46
                                                  In the event of an RA, pilots shall respond immediately by disconnecting the aut oapnid blot y 
                                                  following the RA as indicated using prompt, smooth control inputs unless doing so would jeopardise 
                                                  safety of the aircraft. Pilots must not manoeuvre contrary to the RA. 
                                                   
                                                  The aural annunciation depends on the RA issued (see Table3 ). The threat aircraft symbol on the traffic 
                                                  displays changes to a red solid square and the ranges of the vertical ratest o be avoid and the required 
                                                  vertical rate are displayed on appropriate instruments (implementation dependent). 
                                                   
                                                  If a decision is made not to respond to an RA, the flight crew negates the safety benefits provided by its 
                                                  own TCAS. A decision not to respond also decreases the safety benefits to all other aircraft involved in 
                                                  the encounter.  
                                                   
                                                  Pilots must not manoeuvre contrary to the RA as that could result in a collision with the threat aircraft. 
                                                   
                                                  For corrective RAs, the response should be initiated in the proper direction within 5 seconds of the RA 
                                                  being displayed. The change in vertical speed should be accomplished with an acceleration of 
                                                  approximately ¼ g. 
                                                   
                                                  For increase and reversal RAs, the vertical speed change should be started within 2½ seconds of the RA 
                                                  being displayed. The change in vertical speed should be accomplished with an acceleration of 
                                                  approximately / g.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  47: 
                                                  Practical advice on how to achieve the required acceleration is provide din EASA’s Guidance Material
                                                  “An acceleration of approximately ¼ g will be achieved if the change in pitch attitude corresponding to a 
                                                  change in vertical speed of 1 500 ft/min is accomplished in approximately 5 seconds, and of / g if the change 
                                                  is accomplished in approximately three seconds. The change in pitch attitude required to establish a rate of 
                                                  climb or descent of 1 500 ft/min from level flight will be approximately 6° when the true airspeed (TAS) is 150 kt, 
                                                  4° at 250 kt, and 2° at 500 kt. (These angles are derived from the formula: 1 000 divided by TAS.)”.  
                                                   
                                                  Pilots should avoid excessive responses to RAs – responses to RAs must be followed as indicated on the 
                                                  flight deck instruments. Any excessive rates increase the risk of a follow up conflict (with another aircraft) 
                                                  and are disruptive to ATC. Too weak a response carries a risk that the vertical spacing at CPA will not be 
                                                  sufficient and will cause strengthening RAs to be issued to one or both aircraft involved. 
                                                   
                                                  If a TCAS RA manoeuvre is contrary to other critical cockpit warnings, pilots should respect those other 
                                                  critical warnings – responses to stall warning, wind shear, and GPWS/TAWS take precedence over an 
                                                  ACAS RA, particularly when the aircraft is less than 2,500 feet above ground level (AGL). 
                                                   
                                                  Interaction with ATC during RA 
                                                  Pilots are required to comply with all RAs, even if the RAs are contrary to ATC clearances or instructions 
                                                  unless doing so would endanger the aircraft. Complying with the RA, however, will in many instances 
                                                  cause an aircraft to deviate from its ATC clearance. In this case, the controller is no longer responsible for 
                                                  separation of the aircraft involved in the RA.  
                                                   
                                                  On the other hand, ATC can potentially interfere with the pilot’s response to RAs. If a conflicting ATC 
                                                  instruction coincides with an RA, the pilot might assume that ATC is fully aware of the situation and is 
                                                  providing the better resolution – but in reality ATC cannot be assumed to be aware of the RA until the 
                                                  RA is reported by the pilot. Once the RA is reported by the pilot, ATC is required not to attempt to 
                                                  modify the flight path of the aircraft involved in the encounter. Hence, the pilot is expected to “follow 
                                                  the RA” (even though this does not yet always happen in practice). 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  46 An exception here is the Airbus AP/FD (Autopilot/Flight Director) TCAS capability. See pfaorge m 65or  e 
                                                  information. 
                                                   
                                                  47 European Aviation Safety Agency: Acceptable Means of Compliance (AMC) and Guidance Material (GM) to Pa-CArt T, 
                                                  Annex to ED Decision 2012/018/R, Initial issue 25 October 2012. 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    62                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                  Those RAs that require a deviation from the current ATC clearance or instruction are to be reported to 
                                                  ATC as soon as aircrew workload permits using the following phraseology48:  
                                                   
                                                  [callsign] TCAS RA (pronounced Tee-Cas-Ar-Ay).  
                                                   
                                                  After a “Clear of Conflict” message has been posted by TCAS, the crew should return to the last 
                                                  clearance and notify ATC or seek alternative ATC instructions using the following phraseology:  
                                                   
                                                  [callsign] CLEAR OF CONFLICT (assigned clearance) RESUMED or 
                                                  [callsign] CLEAR OF CONFLICT, RETURNING TO (assigned clearance). 
                                                   
                                                  If an ATC clearance or instruction contradictory to the TCAS RA is received, the pilot must follow the RA 
                                                  and inform ATC as follows: 
                                                   
                                                  [callsign] UNABLE, TCAS RA. 
                                                   
                                                  Some States have implemented “RA downlink display to controller” which provides air traffic controllers 
                                                  automatically with information about RAs posted in the cockpit obtained via Mode S radars or other 
                                                  surveillance means.  
                                                   
                                                  Nuisance RAs 
                                                  Some RAs are perceived by poilts or controllers as a nuisance or unnecessary, as they are generated 
                                                  when it is believed there is no risk of a collision (see also section on TCAS II and ATC operations below).  
                                                   
                                                  ICAO Annex 10 states that an RA shall be considered a nuisance unless, at some point in the encounter 
                                                  in the absence of TCAS II, the horizontal separation and the vertical separation would have been 
                                                  simultaneously less than 2.0 NM and 750 feet (respectively) if above FL100 and 1.2 NM and 750 feet 
                                                  (respectively) if below FL100. 
                                                   
                                                  RAs are triggered if TCAS II calculates that there is a risk of impending collision between aircraft, as 
                                                  defined by the CAS algorithms. Most importantly, the evaluation of whether the RA is nui saisnc  e
                                                  impossible in real-time (i.e. during the event) and it can be done reliably in hindsight only.  
                                                   
                                                  RA and visual acquisition 
                                                  Pilots sometimes do not follow an RA as they believe they have the threat aircraft in sight and judge 
                                                  there will be sufficient separation.  
                                                   
                                                  In this respect, ICAO provisions (see Appendix on page 87) are quite clear that in the event of an RA, the 
                                                  pilot must respond immediately by following the RA unless doing so would jeopardise the safety of the 
                                                  aircraft. That provision applies in all airspace classes and all meteorological conditions (i.e. VMC and IMC). 
                                                  In real-time the pilot has little chance to assess whether the traffic acquired visually is in fact the one 
                                                  against which the RA has been generated A. lso, the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) in their 
                                                  Safety Bulletin highlighted the fact that avoidance manoeuvres based on visual acquisition of traffic may 
                                                  not always provide the appropriate means of avoiding conflicting traffic49. 
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  48 See Appendix page 87 for more information. 
                                                   
                                                  49 EASA Safety Information Bulletin 2013-11 of 19 July 2013 (ACAS II  Ma– noeuvres based on Visual Acquisition of 
                                                  Traffic):  
                                                  http://ad.easa.europa.eu/blob/SIB_201311_ACAS_II_Manoeuvres_Based_on_Visual_Acquisition_of_Traffic.pdf/SIB_
                                                  2013-11_1 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       63                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                                                  Avoidance manoeuvres based on visual acquisition and, especially, manoeuvers contrary to the RA may 
                                                  not always ensure successful collision avoidance due to: 
                                                           Traffic mis-identification; 
                                                           Traffic response to their RAs. 
                                                   
                                                  Closely spaced parallel approaches 
                                                                                                              50, when in the air TCAS II should be operated in TA/RA modet al a l times, 
                                                  As recommended by ICAO
                                                  including during closely spaced parallel approaches. Even when clos-seplacy ed parallel approaches 
                                                  procedures are correctly applied, unnecessary RAs may occasionally occur. However, the safety benefit 
                                                  provided by TCAS II takes precedence over an occasional unnecessary RA. Additionally, there is always a 
                                                  possibility that another aircraft will penetrate the approach airspace causing a real threat. 
                                                   
                                                  Inappropriate pilot responses 
                                                  In some instances pilots ignore RAs or respond in the opposite sense. The main causes are 
                                                  misinterpretation of RA display or RA aural annunciation, giving priority to ATC instruction or performing 
                                                  own avoidance manoeuvre (based on visual acquisition or own judgement). 
                                                   
                                                  Inappropriate pilot responses severely impair TCAS II’s performance and create risks that can be greater 
                                                  than if aircraft were unequipped. For instance, a failure to follow an RA in a coordinated encounter will 
                                                  also restrict the performance of other aircraft’s TCAS I anI d may render the other aircraft's CAT S II less 
                                                  effective than if own aircraft were not TCAS II equipped. 
                                                   
                                                  RAs while aircraft is turning 
                                                  Flying the RA is the highest priority. Therefore, if the aircraft is intugrn, which makes achieving the 
                                                  required vertical rate difficult or impossible, the turn should be stopped. It may happen that stopping 
                                                  the turn will put own aircraft in closer horizontal proximity to the threat aircraft but TCAS is evaluating 
                                                  the situation every second and it will change the RA if required. It is not required to comply with ATC 
                                                  instructions while responding to RAs. 
                                                   
                                                  ICAO ACAS Manual (Doc. 9863) recommends tha t"if possible, comply with the controller’s clearance, e.g. 
                                                  turn to intercept an airway or localizer, at the same time as responding to an RA." 
                                                   
                                                  RAs at the maximum altitude 
                                                  If an ACAS RA occurs when the aircraft is at the maximum altitude for its current weight, the pilots 
                                                  should not assume that they cannot comply with a climb RA because of that. I nca sthees site is 
                                                  acceptable and assumed that speed will be traded for hegiht. Some aircraft types have builtin-  inhibits 
                                                  which will preclude Climb RAs at maximum altitudes. 
                                                   
                                                  Whether or not inhibits apply, it is still possible in some cases for an RA to exceed the capabilities of the 
                                                  aircraft. If a stall warning is generated, a response to stall warning takes precedence over an ACAS RA.  
                                                   
                                                  Pilots must respond to all RAstim a ely  manner, applying the vertical rate required by the RA as 
                                                  accurately as possible in the circumstances and must never manoeuvre opposite to a RA. 
                                                   
                                                  TCAS II AND ATC OPERATIONS 
                                                  The provision of air traffic services to aircraft equipped with TCAS IsI hall be identical to those that are 
                                                  not equipped. In particular, the prevention of collisions and the separation must exclude consideration 
                                                  of aircraft capabilities dependent on ACAS equipment51. 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  50 See the quotes from ICAO PANS-OPS (Doc 8168) on page 89 and ICAO Doc. 9863 on page 90. 
                                                   
                                                  51 See the quote from ICAO PANS-ATM (Doc. 4444) on page 89. 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    64                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                  In some cases, RAs are perceived as disruptive by controllers, especially when the aircraft deviates from 
                                                  the ATC clearance, because of the possibility of an induced conflict with a third aircraft. Although 
                                                  concern about thi spossibility is understandable (and cannot be dismissed) the need for collision 
                                                  avoidance takes precedence. TCAS II is able to simultaneously process several intruders and provide an 
                                                  appropriate RA, so if the deviation from ATC clearance causes a follow-on conflict, TCAS II will respond 
                                                  effectively.  
                                                   
                                                  The most common cases which controllers find disruptive are situations when two aircraft are 
                                                  simultaneously levelling off at 1000 feet apart or one aircraft is levelling off 1000fee t away from a level 
                                                  aircraft and RAs are triggered due to aircraft’s high vertical rate ws hen approaching the cleared flight 
                                                  level. ICAO Annex 6 (see page 87) recommends that the vertical rate should be reduced to 1500 ft/min. 
                                                  or less throughout the last 1000 feet of climb or descent to the assigned altitude when the pilot is made 
                                                  aware of another aircraft at or approaching an adjacent altitude or standard flight level, unless otherwise 
                                                  instructed by ATC. Still, in some geometries these RAs may occur. In csae of non-compliance (e.g. level 
                                                  bust by one of the aircraft involved), these RAs provide collision avoidance protection.  
                                                   
                                                  For the majority of RAs which require a deviation from the ATC clearance, the vertical deviation should 
                                                  not exceed a few hundred feet (given correct pilot response).  
                                                   
                                                  TCAS II operation may not bec ompatible with altitude crossing clearances based upon agreed visual 
                                                  separation. In these situations RAs may be triggered and the provision of traffic information by the 
                                                  controller does not permit the pilot to ignore the RA.  
                                                   
                                                  RAs are often issued against VFR aircraft on the edge of controlled airspace. Even if the TCAS equipped 
                                                  aircraft pilot believes s/he has the threat aircraft in sight, these RAs must be also followed as there is no 
                                                  certainty that the traffic acquired visually is in fact the one against which the RA has been generated. 
                                                   
                                                  In the case of close aircraft proximity and in the absence of an RA report, controllers should provide 
                                                  horizontal avoiding instructions as they will be compatible with any RAs and may help to reduce the risk 
                                                  of a collision. However, controllers should be aware that when already responding to an RA, the pilot 
                                                  may not be able to turn the aircraft and fly the RA at the same time (and will therefore give priority to 
                                                  the RA). 
                                                  AIRBUS AUTOPILOT/FLIGHT DIRECTOR (AP/FD) CAPABILITY 
                                                  An Airbus AP/FD TCAS capability is a guidance mode which allows the aircraft to autoatimcally fly the 
                                                  RA if the autopilot is engaged or the pilot to handfly the RA by following the flight director commands52. 
                                                  The AP/FD capability is currently available for all Airbus aircraft (except A340s).  
                                                   
                                                  Broadly speaking, when an AP/FD aircraft receives an RA, the aircraft auwtoill matically  change its 
                                                  vertical speed to the vertical speed prescribed by the current RA plus 200 ft/min. (in order to help the 
                                                  flight crew monitoring of the RA response), unless the RA prescribes a null vertical speed (e.g. a Level Off 
                                                  RA), in which case the aircraft will change its vertical speed to 0 ft/min. The manoeuvre starts without 
                                                  delay and has been demonstrated to be equivalent to standard response delays ( 53 s –econds) and 
                                                  accelerations (0.15 – 0.25 g). 
                                                   
                                                  When the RA is terminated, the AP/FD function wil lguide the aircraft to the selected altitud eAll lo.                                                                                                                            w 
                                                  level TCAS inhibitions are applicable (see page 56). 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  52 Specified in the Minimum Aviation System Performance Specification (MASPS) for Flight Guidance System (FGS) 
                                                  coupled to ACAS published by EUROCAE (ED-224). 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       65                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                                                  AIRBUS TCAS ALERT PREVENTION (TCAP) FUNCTIONALITY 
                                                  A TCAS Alert Prevention (TCAP )functionality has been introduced by Airbus to prevent the generation 
                                                  of RAs in 1000f-oot level-off geometries53. The functionality which is currently available for the Airbus 
                                                  wide body aircraft (and expected to become available on the A320 family of aircraft) uses a new altitude 
                                                  capture law for flight guidance computers, which decreases aircraft’s verctial rate towards the selected 
                                                  altitude, once a TA has been generated and the au-pilotot and/or flight director are engaged (se e
                                                  Figure 28). 
                                                   
                                                  The TCAP functionality  is complementary to the flight guidance comp’us cteronventional altitude 
                                                  capture function.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                  Figure 28: Illustration of an encounter without and with TCAP functionality. 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  53 Specified in the Minimum Aviation System Performance Specification (MASPS) for Flight Guidance System (FGS) 
                                                  coupled to ACAS published by EUROCAE (ED-224). 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    66                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                  RA STATISTICS 
                                                  Frequency of RAs 
                                                  It has been estimated, through various monitoring programmes and data obtained from operatosr, that 
                                                  an RA occurs approximately every 1000 flight hours on short and medium haul aircraft. The frequency 
                                                  decreases to an RA every 3000 hours for long haul aircraft.  
                                                   
                                                  Although most RAs are reported through the aircraft operator or ANSP reporting system, tshere are no 
                                                  comprehensive Europea-nwide statistics on the frequency of their occHurroewnceveer. , 
                                                                                                                        54 collects and analyess data from Mode S radars and also processes 
                                                  EUROCONTROL’s EVAIR project
                                                  reports received from other sources (e.g. pilot or ATC reports). 
                                                   
                                                  In 2014, the EVAIR monitoring based on the recording from 13 Mode S radars in core European airspace 
                                                  found that in the vast majority of encounters only one aircraft involved in the encounter received an RA 
                                                  (see Figure 29)55. Possible reasons are:  
                                                           the geometry of the conflict was such that the RA was not generated on the TCAS II equipped 
                                                            threat aircraft;  
                                                           the threat aircraft was not TCAS II equipped;  
                                                           the threat’s TCAS II was in TA-only mode. 
                                                   
                                                  On average three RA encounters were observed each day in the area covered by the 13 radars. RAs are 
                                                  much more frequent in lower airspace, mainly due to higher vertical rates and more manoeuvres by 
                                                  aircraft.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                  Figure 29: RA distribution by threat type. 
                                                   
                                                  The most common initial RA (44%) was a single Adjust Vertical Speed or Level Off RA, followed by 
                                                  Monitor Vertical Speed and Climb or Descend RAs (see Figure 30). 
                                                   
                                                  Only 20% of initial RAs resulted in a secondary RA. Here, the most common RAs were again Adjust 
                                                  Vertical Speed or Level Off RA (65%). Reversal RAs occurred in 6% of cases, while strengthening RAs (i.e. 
                                                  Increase Climb or Increase Descent) in 9% of cases (see Figure 31). 
                                                   
                                                  It can be assumed that with the inotrduction of version 7.1 and the replacement of the Adjust Vertical 
                                                  Speed RA with the Level Off RA, the latter will be the most frequently observed RA. 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  54 EUROCONTROL Voluntary ATM Incident Report. Fingor more information and to access full reports go to: 
                                                  www.eurocontrol.int/services/evair  
                                                   
                                                  55 Source: EVAIR Safety Bulletin no 14 (2010-2014). 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       67                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                                                                       19%                      2%                                                                                                                                          9% 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2%  6% 
                                                                                                                                       44%                AVSA/LOLO 
                                                                                                                                                          Monitor VS 
                                                                                                                                                          Climb/Desc. 
                                                                                                                                                          Maintain VS                                     18% 
                                                                                                                                                          Reversal                                                                                                                        65% 
                                                                33%                                                                                       Increase CL/DES 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                  Figure 30: RA distribution by initial RA type.                                                                                                    Figure 31: RA distribution by secondary RA type. 
                                                   
                                                  Pilot compliance 
                                                  The EVAIR monitoring has also looked into pilot compliance with RAs. In 2014, 75% of initial RAs (i.e. the 
                                                  first RA in the encounter) were followed correctly while the remaining 52% were either excessive, too 
                                                  weak or opposite responses (see Figure 32). Secondary RAs (i.e. any subsequent RA in the encounter) in 
                                                  2014 were followed at the desired vertical rate only in 64% of cases (see Figure 33). 
                                                   
                                                                                       8%                                                                                                                                                 10% 
                                                                           5%                                                                                                                                              3% 
                                                            12%                                                                                            Followed                                         15% 
                                                                                                                                                           Too weak 
                                                                                                                                                           Excessive 
                                                                                                                                                           Opposite                                                                                                                        64% 
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                   75% 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                  Figure 32: Pilot responses to initial RAs.                                                                                                          Figure 33: Pilot responses to secondary RAs. 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                  Vertical rates 
                                                  EVAIR monitoring data indicates that asmu                                                         ch as 35% of RAs are generated due to high vertical rates 
                                                  and 75% of the aircraft getting an RA in the lev-eolff geometry approach their cleared level with a rate 
                                                  above 1500 ft/min. These RAs are not operationally needed and can be avoided in many cases if vertical 
                                                  rate reductions, as recommended by ICAO (see page 87), are applied.  
                                                   
                                                  RAs by threat type 
                                                  In 2007 a monitoring study examined the distribution of RA encounters as a function of the equipage of 
                                                                                                                                   56. The summary of the results is shown in Figure 34. 
                                                  the threat aircraft and its TCAS status
                                                   
                                                  In the vast majority of encounte,r os nly one aircraft involved in the encounter received an RA. In the 
                                                  equipped – equipped encounters, an RA wasno  t generated on the TCA-Sequipped threat aircraft in 
                                                  47% of cases. In 32% of cases the threat aircraft was not TCAS equipped. 
                                                   
                                                  Only in 20% of encounters did RAs occur on both aircraft involved.  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  56 Source: EUROCONTROL PASS Project Report: Analysis of RA Downlink data, Version 1.5, PASS/WA1/WP4/38, March 2009 .
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    68                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                 20%           Equipped with
                                                               coordinated RA
                    47%                                        Unequipped or TCAS
                                                               out of service
                                                               TA-only mode
                                                      32%      Equipped but no RA
                                   1% 
                                                                                  
                   Figure 34: Distribution of RA encounters as a function of threat aircraft equipage. 
                    
                   TCAS II AND GROUND-BASED SHORT TERM CONFLICT ALERT (STCA) 
                   Air traffic controllers are assisted by Short Term Conflict Alert (STCA), a gro-buandsed  system that 
                   generates alerts warning of a potential or actual infringement of separation minima. TCAS II and STCA 
                   operate independently which provides redundancy and minimises single points of failure (the only 
                   common source of data is the altitude reports from aircraft transponders). TCAS II and STCA are not 
                   entirely compatible with each other. Whilst the desired behaviour is that STCA alerts at least 30 seconds 
                   before the first RA, STCA can and sometimes will trigger significantly later (sometimes even after the RA). 
                   This is a result of the differences listed  Tainble  9.  Providing sufficient warning time is not always 
                   possible, particularly in the case of sudden, unexpected manoeuvres. 
                                                 
                   ACAS GUIDE December 2017                 69                            EUROCONTROL 
                    
                                                  STCA and TCAS II have limited or no knowel dge of controller and pilot intentions and actions. Hence, 
                                                  when a controller provides an instruction(s) to avoid a loss of separation, STCA and/or TCAS II alerts may 
                                                  still be triggered, even if the pilot has already initiated a manoeuvre corresponding to the controller’s 
                                                  instruction. 
                                                   
                                                  Table 9: Differences between STCA and TCAS II. 
                                                                                                                                     STCA                                                                                     TCAS II 
                                                                                                 Ground-based surveillance has 5 to 
                                                                                                 10 seconds update rate and good 
                                                                                                 azimuth resolution.                                                                        TCAS surveillance function has 
                                                     Performance                                                                                                                            1 second update rate and poor 
                                                                                                 Tracks often based on multiple data 
                                                                                                 sources (TCAS tracks based on single  azimuth resolution. 
                                                                                                 data source). 
                                                                                                  
                                                     Vertical                                    STCA uses tracked altitude and vertical  TCAS knows own altitude and vertical 
                                                     tracking                                    rate based on reported altitudes (2-5                                                      rate with 1-foot precision. 
                                                                                                 foot or 100-foot precision). 
                                                                                                 STCA detects imminent or actual 
                                                                                                                                                                                            TCAS assumes collision and provides 
                                                                                                 (significant) loss of minimum 
                                                     Operation                                   separation but provides no resolution  resolution advice to ensure sufficiet n
                                                                                                 advice.                                                                                    vertical separation at CPA. 
                                                                                                 STCA is not standardised but 
                                                     Predictability                              optimised for the operatioTCnaASl  is fully standardised. 
                                                                                                 environment to varying degrees. 
                                                     Communication  Complete by providing instructions Limited (pilot reporting not always 
                                                                                                 subject to read-back/hear-back.                                                            possible in a timely manner). 
                                                                                                 Only when controller immediately 
                                                     Effectiveness                               assesses the situation, issues aOnlny w                                                                            hen pilot promptly and 
                                                                                                 appropriate instruction to pilot ancord rectly follows the RA. 
                                                                                                 pilot follows the instruction. 
                                                   
                                                  TCAS II PRESSURE SETTING 
                                                  For the determination of collision avoidance resolution, TCAS II always utilises pressure altitude 
                                                  information which relates to the standard pressure (altimeter setting 1013.25 hPa or 29.92 inches of 
                                                  mercury). TCAS II operations are not affected if aircraft are flying Flight Levels on the standard pressure 
                                                  setting, altitude on QNH, or height on QFE as the same pressure setti n(gi.e. standard) is always used. 
                                                  The pressure selection by the flight crew does not affect the TCAS II system at all57.  
                                                   
                                                  Additionally, below 1750 feet TCAS II also uses radar altimeter datato i  nvoke TA/RA inhibitions due to 
                                                  proximity to the ground (see RA inhibition on page 56).  
                                                   
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  57 Except some TCAS traffic displays which allow the crew to toggle between pressure corrected and standard 
                                                  pressure altitudes. 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    70                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                                                TCAS II/TRANSPONDER OPERATIONS ON THE GROUND 
                                                TCAS II operation on the airport surface provides no safety benefit. Routine operation of TCAS II on the 
                                                ground can degrade surveillance performed by airborne TCAS II units and performance of ATC radars.  
                                                 
                                                When on the ground, the pilots may turn TCAS II on for a short period of time before crossing/entering 
                                                an active runway to double-check for the presence of any aircraft on short finals. 
                                                 
                                                The modes of TCAS II/transponder operations are explained in and illustrated in Figure 35. 
                                                 
                                                          PPuushshbback rack reqequuestest: :                                                                         AAAApppppppprrrrooooaaaacccchhhhiiiinnnngggg h h h hoooollllddddiiiinnnngggg p p p poooossssiiiititititioooonnnn: : : : 
                                                             TTrrananssponderponder O ONN                                                                                           TTTTrrrrananananssssponderponderponderponder O O O ONNNN
                                                                  TTCCAS OAS OFFFF                                                                                                       TTTTCCCCAS OAS OAS OAS ONNNN
                                                                                                             VVaaccaatitinngg r ruunnwwaayy: : 
                                                                                                               TTrrananssponderponder O ONN
                                                                AAt t ththee g gaatete::                            TTCCAS OAS OFFFF
                                                     TTrrananssponderponder O OFFFF//SSTTBBYY
                                                                 TTCCAS OAS OFFFF
                                                Figure 35: TCAS II/transponder operation on the ground. 
                                                 
                                                TCAS II TRAINING 
                                                Pilots 
                                                TCAS II indications are intended to assist pilots in the avoidance of potential collisions. For the system to 
                                                achieve its intended safety benefits, pilots must operate the system and respond to TCAS II advisories in 
                                                a manner compatible with the system design. Many advisories involve more than one TCAS II equipped 
                                                aircraft. In these coordinated encounters, it is essential that the flight crew on each aircraft respond in 
                                                the expected manner. Therefore, pilot training and understanding of TCAS II operations is essential. 
                                                 
                                                ICAO has recognised the importance of a suitable training programme for pilots and controllers. The 
                                                guidelines for training are contained in the ICAO ACAS Manual (Doc. 9863) and IC-OPSAO PA                                                                                                                                          NS
                                                (Doc. 8168). 
                                                 
                                                Controllers 
                                                TCAS II training for air traffic controllers should have a different focus than pilot training. ICAO in the 
                                                ACAS Manual (Doc. 9863) recommends that air traffic controllers are provided with formal ACAS II 
                                                training. The objective of the training is to enable air traffic controllers to better manage situations in 
                                                which TCAS RA occur by understanding how TCAS II works, and by understanding the responsibilities of 
                                                pilots and air traffic controllers during a TCAS event. 
                                                 
                                                Training resources 
                                                EUROCONTROL and other organisations have produced a number of publications to support TCAS II 
                                                training and awareness. The list of these publications can be found on page 74. 
                                                ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                  71                                                                          EUROCONTROL 
                                                 
          INTERCEPTIONS OF TCAS II EQUIPPED AIRCRAFT 
          In some circumstances, like a prolonged communication loss, it is necessary that military fighters 
          intercept a civilian aircraft in order to provide assistance or check on the safety of the flight. 
           
          If the intercepting military aircraft does not switch off its Mode C or, if equipped operate its transponder 
          in Intercept Mode then an intercepted aircraft equipped with TCAS II may perceive the interceptor as a 
          collision threat and might perform manoeuvres in response to an RA. Such manoeuvres might be 
          misinterpreted by the interceptor as an indication of unfriendly intentions. 
           
          Consequently, the intercepting aircraft’s Mode C should either be inhibited or Intercept Mode selceted 
          within 20 NM of the target aircraft, to prevent unnecessary RAs. This will preserve flight safety whilst still 
          permitting the prosecution of the intercept. 
           
          EQUIPAGE OUTSIDE THE CURRENT MANDATE 
          ACAS II has been design with larger commercial aircraft in mind and mandated on this class of aircraft. 
          However, operators of several aircraft classes outside the current mandate have decided to equip their 
          aircraft with ACAS II for various reasons. These include military transport aircraft, business jets and large 
          helicopters. The principle of operations on the aircraft outside the mandate is the same as on the aircraft 
          on which ACAS II is mandated. 
           
          At the time of writing, Light Jets (LJ) and Very Light Jets (VLJ) are not mandated to carry ACAS II as their 
          MTOM and passenger capacity are below the thresholds specified in the current equipage mandate (see 
          page  20). Likewise, it has not yet been determined whether UAS or R  wPAillS be required to be 
          equipped with ACAS II or any other dedicated collision avoidance system. 
           
          TRANSPONDER TESTING ON THE GROUND 
          TCAS II interrogates, within its range, all Mode S and Mode A/C transponders. That will include groun-d
          based transponders operated for testing or maintenance. If these transponders respond with an altitude 
          report close to that of aircraft flying above in the vicinity, their TCAS II Traffic Display will show a ‘ghost’ 
          target and could even generate TAs/RAs against such targets. These unnecessary alerts are disruptive to 
          the flight crew and controllers. 
           
          To avoid these unnecessary alerts special caution and appropriate procedures are required during 
          transponder testing and maintenance. In order to prevent the transmission of a virtual altitude (which 
          could then be mistakenly used by airborne sytsems) effective screening or absorption devices on the 
          antennas must be employed or the ramp test set must be physically connected to the antenna system. 
          Where possible, the testing should be performed inside a hangar to take advantage of any shielding 
          properties it may provide. Finally, if possible the altitude should be set to an unrealistically high (e.g. over 
          60,000 feet) or low value (e.g. negative 2000 feet). 
                         
          EUROCONTROL         72       ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
           
                      CONCLUSIONS 
                       
                      Airborne Collision Avoidance Systems are a last resort system designed to pentre mv  idair collisions 
                      between aircraft. Currently, this role is fulfilled by TCAS I aInd a new generation of Airborne Collision 
                      Avoidance Systems (ACAS X) is being developed. 
                       
                      The technical features of the system provide a significant improvement in flighsta fety and TCAS II has 
                      attained universal recognition in the world of aviation. TAs and RAs are relatively infrequent and are 
                      unplanned events, which call for prompt and appropriate reactions from the flight crew. Consequently, 
                      flight crew require specific and recurrent training in TCAS procedures. 
                       
                      TCAS II operations have aefn fect  on ATC. It is therefore essential that controllers have a good 
                      knowledge of the TCAS II system’s characteristics and of the procedures used by pilots. Controllers are 
                      also required to provide the same ATC service, especially with regard to traffic information or the 
                      maintenance of the relevant ATC separation, whether the aircraft are fitted with TCAS or not. 
                       
                      The implementation of TCAS II has increased the safety and reduced th epossibility of midair collision. 
                      However, in order for TCAS II to continue to deliver its safety benefit, it is essential that pilots and 
                      controllers are adequately trained on TCAS II operations and followed the procedures. 
                      ACAS GUIDE December 2017                        73                                EUROCONTROL 
                       
                            ADDITIONAL TRAINING & INFORMATION RESOURCES 
                            EUROCONTROL ACAS II BULLETINS 
                            A series of ACAS II Bulletins has been published since 2002, each focusing on a different current 
                            operational theme of interest to both aircrews and air traffic controllers. In the Bullet-ilnsife  real
                            examples are used to show how others reacted during RAs, what kind of mistakes were made, how 
                            correct actions improved or could have improved the situation.  
                             
                                                                                              to access all EUROCONTROL ACAS Bulletins.  
                            Go to www.eurocontrol.int/acas or www.skybrary.aero
                             
                            Note: The information contained in EUROCONTROL ACAS II Bulletins is accurate at the time of publishing but is 
                            subject to change.
                                                 
                             
                                                                                                                                                    
                                 1 - Follow the RA!          2 - RAs and 1000 ft level-        3 - Wrong reaction to         4 - TCAS II and VFR traffic  
                                    (July 2002)                   off manoeuvres              “Adjust Vertical Speed"               (May 2004) 
                                                                   (March 2003)                         RAs 
                                                                                                  (October 2003) 
                                                                                                                                                    
                              5 - Controller and Pilot        6 - Incorrect use of the      7 - The Dos and Don'ts of        8 - TCAS II Operations in 
                               ACAS regulation and              TCAS traffic display            TCAS II Operations           European RVSM Airspace 
                                      training                     (March 2005)                    (March 2006)                     (May 2006) 
                                  (October 2004) 
                                                                                                                                                    
                               9 - Frequently Asked           10 - When ATC meets           11 - ACAS world is moving           12 - Focus on pilot 
                                     Questions                        TCAS II                            on                           training  
                                    (July 2007)                  (November 2007)                    (May 2010)                    (February 2011) 
                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                    Continued overleaf 
                                                                        
                            EUROCONTROL                                                 74                          ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                             
                                                                                                                                                 
                            13 - Reversing to resolve      14 - Version 7.1 is coming          15 - Not so fast…           16 - “Traffic, traffic” TCAS 
                                (September 2011)                 (January 2012)                   (May 2012)                   Traffic Advisories 
                                                                                                                               (December 2012) 
                                                                                                                                                 
                           17 - “Level off, level off” RA      18 - Notable recent              19 - ATC Matters             20 - Low level events 
                                  (August 2014)                operational events               (February 2016)                   (June 2016) 
                                                                   (May 2015)  
                                                                                  
                           21- Bizjets are amongst us         22- ATC vertical rate 
                                 (February 2017)                   instructions 
                                                               (November 2017) 
                            
                                                                       
                           ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                    75                                         EUROCONTROL 
                            
          EUROCONTROL TRAINING PRESENTATIONS 
          Go to www.eurocontrol.int/acas  or  www.skybrary.aero  to access all EUROCONTROL ACAS training 
          publications.  
           
                     Overview of ACAS II (incorporating version 7.1)
                                         
                      
                      
                    
                     TCAS II version 7.1 for air traffic controllers 
                      
                    
                     TCAS II version 7.1 for pilots  
                      
                    
           
           
          For further information please contact: 
          acas@eurocontrol.int  
          www.eurocontrol.int/acas  
                         
          EUROCONTROL         76       ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
           
                   OTHER TRAINING RESOURCES 
                   Click on a link to access a specific publication or use the URL provided.  
                    
                                         SKYbrary article on ACAS with links to several other training resources 
                                          
                                         www.skybrary.aero/index.php/Airborne_Collision_Avoidance_System_(ACAS) 
                                      
                                         FAA Booklet – Introduction to TCAS II version 7.1 (February 28, 2011)  
                                          
                                         www.faa.gov/documentLibrary/media/Advisory_Circular/ 
                                         TCAS%20II%20V7.1%20Intro%20booklet.pdf 
                                          
                                         The Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System by James K. Kuchar and Ann 
                                         C. Drumm – an article from the Lincoln Laboratory Journal (Volume 16, 
                                         Number 2, 2007) 
                                          
                                         www.ll.mit.edu/publications/journal/pdf/vol16_no2/ 
                                         16_2_04Kuchar.pdf 
                    
                   ACAS X INFORMATION RESOURCES 
                   Click on a link to access a specific publication or use the URL provided.  
                    
                                        SKYbrary article on ACAS X 
                                         
                                        www.skybrary.aero/index.php/ACAS_X 
                                      
                                        Next-Generation Airborne Collision Avoidance System by Mykel J. 
                                        Kochenderfer, Jessica E. Holland, and James P. Chryssanthacopoulos 
                                         
                                        www.ll.mit.edu/publications/journal/pdf/vol19_no1/19_1_1_Kochenderfer.pdf 
                                    
                                        EUROCONTROL NetAlert 17 newsletter on ACAS X 
                                         
                                        www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/2390.pdf 
                                    
                                        HindSight 22 – The new kid on the block 
                                         
                                        http://skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/3265.pdf 
                                    
                   ACAS GUIDE December 2017                 77                            EUROCONTROL 
                    
                                                  GLOSSARY 
                                                   
                                                  The glossary is provided for reference only and it has been derived from the definitions published in ICAO 
                                                  Annex 10, ICAO PANS-OPS (Doc. 9863), ICAO PANS-ATM (Doc 4444), and TCAS II MOP S(RTCA DO-185B and 
                                                  EUROCAE ED-143) .  
                                                   
                                                  ACAS I – (“ay-cas one”) – Provides information as an aid to “see and avoid” action but does not include 
                                                  the capability for generating resolution advisories (RAs). 
                                                  ACAS II – (“ay-cas two”) – Provides vertical resolution advisories (RAs) in addition to traffic advisories 
                                                  (TAs). 
                                                  ACAS III–  (“ay-cas three”) – Provides vertical and horizontal resolution advisories (RAs) in addition to 
                                                  traffic advisories (TAs)58. 
                                                  ACAS X – (“ay-cas eks”) – A family of new collision avoidance systems currently under development. It 
                                                  takes advantage of recent advances in ‘dynamic programming’ and other computer science techniques .
                                                  See page 21 for more information.  
                                                  Aircraft (Mode S 24-bit) address – A unique combination of 24 bits available for assignment to an 
                                                  aircraft for the purpose of air-ground communications, navigation and surveillance. Also known as ICAO 
                                                  24-bit Aircraft Address. 
                                                  Altitude crossing RA – A resolution advisory is altitude crossing if own ACAS aircraft is currently at least 
                                                  100 feet below or above the threat aircraft for upward or downward sense advisories, respectively. 
                                                  Bearing  –  The angle of the target aircraft in the horizontal plane, measure clockwise from the 
                                                  longitudinal axis of the own aircraft. 
                                                  Closest Point of Approach (CPA) – The occurrence of minimum (slant) range between own ACAS 
                                                  aircraft and the intruder. Range at CPA is the smallest range between the two aircraft and time at CPA is 
                                                  the time at which it occurs. 
                                                  Collision avoidance logic – The sub-system or part of ACAS that analyses data relating to an intruder 
                                                  and own aircraft, decides whether or not advisories are appropriate and, if so, generates the advisories. It 
                                                  includes the following functions: range and altituder tacking, threat detection and RA generation. It 
                                                  excludes surveillance. 
                                                  Collision Avoidance System (CAS) – Collision avoidance logic subsystem within TCAS. 
                                                  Corrective advisory – A resolution advisory that instructs the pilot to deviate from current vertical rate, 
                                                  for example a Level fOf RA when the aircraft is climbin Sgee a.                                                                                     lso: Preventive advisory .A  Corrective 
                                                  advisory can be Positive or Negative. Crossing RA – See: Altitude crossing RA. 
                                                  Distance Modification (DMOD) – Safety factor incorporated in range measurements to account for 
                                                  possible accelerations by the intruder. The value of distance modification varies with the sensitivity level 
                                                  (in line with the time thresholds). 
                                                  Downward sense RA – Indicates that own aircraft intends to pass below the threat (the RAC tells the 
                                                  other aircraft “do not pass below me”). See also: Upward sense RA. 
                                                  Established track – A track generated by TCAS ai-tor -air surveillance that is treated as the track of an 
                                                  actual aircraft.  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  58 ACAS III is unlikely to materialize due to difficulties the conventio snaurlveillance systems have with horizontal 
                                                  tracking. ACAS X will be the next generation of collision avoidance systems. 
                                                   
                                                  EUROCONTROL                                                                                                    78                                                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                                                   
                       False Advisory – An advisory caused by a false track or a TCAS malfunction. See also: Unnecessary RA 
                       and Nuisance RA.  
                       Horizontal Miss Distance (HMD )– The horizontal range between two aircraft at the Closest Point of 
                       Approach. 
                       ICAO 24-bit Aircraft Address – see: Aircraft (Mode S 24-bit) address. 
                       Increased rate RA – A resolution advisory with a strength that recommends increasing the altitude rate 
                       to a value exceeding that recommended by a previous climb or descend RA.  
                       Intruder (aircraft) – An SSR transponder-equipped aircraft within the surveillance range of ACAS for 
                       which ACAS has an established track. 
                       Master aircraft – for the purpose of TCAS-TCAS coordination, an aircraft with the lower Mode S 24-bit 
                       address. 
                       Miss Distance Filtering (MDF) – A process in the TCAS threat detection logic which allows nuiasnce 
                       RAs in encounters with a significant HMD to be suppressed (in suitable encounter geometries). The 
                       process can also allow the early removal of an RA before the closest point of approach. 
                       Mode S address – See: Aircraft address. 
                       Near Midair Collision (NMAC) – Two aircraft simultaneously coming within 100 feet vertically and 
                       500 feet (0.08 NM) horizontally. 
                       Negative advisory – A type of RA which tells the pilot which actions should be avoided, such as do not 
                       descend (announced as Monitor Vertical Speed). See also: Positive advisory. A Negative advisory can be 
                       Corrective or Preventive. 
                       Nuisance RA – In terms of compatibility with Air Traffic Management, an RA shall be considered a 
                       “nuisance” unless, at some point in the encounter in the absence of TCAS IIh, te horizontal separation 
                       and the vertical separation are simultaneously less than 750 feet vertically and 2 NM horizontally (if 
                       above FL100) or 1.2 NM (if below FL100). See also: Unnecessary RA and False RA.  
                       Own aircraft – The aircraft fitted with the ACAS that is the subject of the discourse, which ACAS is to 
                       protect against possible collisions, and which may enter a manoeuvre in response to an ACAS 
                       indication. 
                       Positive advisory – An advisory that requires either a climb or a descent. . See also: Negative advisory.  
                       Potential threat (aircraft) – An intruder that has passed the Potential Threat classification criteria for a 
                       TA and does not meet the Threat Classification criteria for an RA. 
                       Preventive advisory – A resolution advisory that instructs the piltoot av     oid certain deviations from 
                       current vertical rate, for example a Level fOf RA when the aircraft is level. See also: Corrective adviso. ry
                       A Preventive advisory can be Positive or Negative. 
                       Proximate aircraft – Nearby aircraft within 1200 feet and 6 NM which do not meet either the threat or 
                       the potential threat classification criteria. 
                       RA sense – The sense of an ACAS II RA is “upward” if it requires climb or limitation of descent rate and 
                       “downward” if it requires descent or limitation of climb rate. It can be both upward and downward 
                       simultaneously if it requires limitation of the vertical rate to a specified range. 
                       Relative altitude – The difference in altitude between own aircraft and a target aircraft. The value is 
                       positive when the target is higher and negative when the target is lower. 
                       ACAS GUIDE December 2017                           79                                   EUROCONTROL 
                        
          Resolution  Advisory  Complement (RAC)  –  Information provided by one ACAS to another via a 
          Mode S interrogation in order t oensure complementary manoeuvres by restricting the choice of 
          manoeuvres available to the ACAS receiving the RAC. 
          Reversed sense RA – A resolution advisory that has had its sense reversed. 
          Risk ratio – The ratio between the risk of collision with ACAS II and the risk of collision without ACAS II. 
          Sensitivity Level (SL) – An integer defining a set of parameters used by the traffic advisory (TA) and 
          collision avoidance algorithms to control the warning time provided by the potential threat and threat 
          detection logic, as well as the values of parameters relevant to the RA selection logic. 
          Short Term Conlifct Alert (STCA) – A ground-based safety net intended to assist the controller in 
          preventing collision between aircraft by generating, in a timely manner, an alert of a potential or actual 
          infringement of separation minima. 
          Squitter – Spontaneous transmission generated by Mode S transponders. 
          Slave aircraft – for the purpose of TCAS-TCAS coordination, an aircraft with the higher Mode S 2-4bit 
          address. 
          Strengthening RA – A change in RA to another RA that is more restrictive or requires a greater vertical 
          rate but is in the same sense as the previous RA. 
          Target – A transponder-equipped aircraft within the surveillance range of ACAS that is being tracked. 
          TCAS – Traffic alert and Collision Avoidance System – an aircraft equipment that is an implementation 
          of an ACAS. 
          Track – Estimated position and velocity of a single aircraft based on correlated surveillance data reports. 
          Threat (aircraft) – An intruder deserving special attention either because of its close proximity to own 
          aircraft or because successive range and altitude measurements indicate that it could be on a collision 
          or near collision course with own aircraft. The warning time provided against a threat is sufficiently small 
          that an RA is justified. 
          Traffic Advisory (TA) – An indication given to the flight crew that a certain intruder is a potential threat. 
          This indication contains no suggested manoeuvre.  
          Transponder (Mode C) – ATC transponder that replies with both identification and altitude data. 
          Transponder (Mode S) – ATC transponder that replies to an interrogation containing its own, unique 
          ICAO 24-bit aircraft address and with altitude data. 
          Unnecessary RA  –The ACAS II system generated an advisory in accordance with its technical 
          specifications in a situation where there was not or would not have been a risk of collision between the 
          aircraft. See also: Nuisance RA and False RA.  
          Upward sense RA – Indicates that own aircraft intends to pass above the threat (the RAC tells the other 
          aircraft “do not pass above me”). See also: Downward sense RA. 
          Vertical Miss Distance (VMD) – The relative altitude between own and intruder aircraft at closest point 
          of approach. 
          Vertical Resolution Advisory Complement (VRC) – Information provided by one TCAS to another via 
          a coordination interrogation to ensure compleentmary manoeuvres by restricting the choice of 
          manoeuvres available to the TCAS receiving the VRC.  
          EUROCONTROL         80       ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
           
                   Warning Time – The time interval between potential threat or threat detection and closest approach 
                   when neither aircraft accelerates. 
                   Weakening RA – A resolution advisory with a strength that recommends decrease the altitude rate to 
                   a value below that recommended by a previous RA, when the initially issued RA is predicted to provide 
                   sufficient vertical spacing. 
                    
                   ACAS GUIDE December 2017                 81                            EUROCONTROL 
                    
                   ABBREVIATIONS 
                   
                   ACAS      Airborne Collision Avoidance System 
                   ACASA     ACAS Analysis (EUROCONTROL project in support of the mandate for the carriage of 
                             ACAS II in Europe) 
                   ADC       Air Data Computer 
                   ADS-B     Automatic Dependent Surveillance - Broadcast 
                   AGL       Above Ground Level 
                   ALIM      Altitude Limit – Vertical Threshold for Corrective Resolution Advisory 
                   ANSP      Air Navigation Service Provider 
                   AP/FD     Autopilot/Flight Director 
                   ASAS      Airborne Separation Assurance Systems 
                   ATC       Air Traffic Control 
                   ATCRBS    Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon System 
                   BCAS      Beacon Collision Avoidance System 
                   CAS       Collision Avoidance System 
                   CDTI      Cockpit Display of Traffic Information 
                   CENA      Centre d’Études de la Navigation Aérienne (France) 
                   CPA       Closest Point of Approach 
                   CSPO      Closely Spaced Parallel Operations 
                   CVSM      Conventional Vertical Separation Minima 
                   DMOD      Distance Modification  
                   DMTL      Dynamic Minimum Triggering Level 
                   DNA       Designated No Alerts (mode) 
                   EASA      European Aviation Safety Agency 
                   ECAC       European Civil Aviation Conference 
                   EFIS      Electronic Flight Instrument System 
                   EICAS     Engine Indication and Crew Alerting System 
                   EUROCAE  European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment 
                   EVAIR     EUROCONTROL Voluntary ATM Incident Reporting 
                   FAA       Federal Aviation Administration (USA) 
                   FL        Flight Level 
                   FMS       Flight Management System 
                   FRUIT     False Replies from Unsynchronised Interrogator Transmissions 
                   ft        Feet 
                   ft/min.   Feet per minute 
                   g         Gravitational acceleration of 9.81 m/sec² 
                  EUROCONTROL                            82                ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                   
                   GNSS       Global Navigation Satellite System 
                   GPWS       Ground Proximity Warning System 
                   hPa        Hectopascals 
                   ICAO       International Civil Aviation Organization 
                   IMC        Instrument Meteorological Conditions 
                   IVSI       Instantaneous Vertical Speed Indicator 
                   kg         Kilogram(s) 
                   kts        Knots (NM/hour) 
                   LJ         Light Jet(s) 
                   m          Meter(s) 
                   MASPS      Minimum Aviation System Performance Specification 
                   MDF        Miss Distance Filtering 
                   MEL        Minimum Equipment List 
                   MHz        Megahertz 
                   MOPS       Minimum Operational Performance Standards 
                   MTOM       Maximum Take-off Mass 
                   m/s        Meters per second 
                   m/sec      Meters per second 
                   n/a        Not applicable 
                   NAR        Non-altitude reporting [target] 
                   NAS        National Airspace System (USA) 
                   ND         Navigation Display 
                   NextGen    Next Generation Transportation System (USA) 
                   NM         Nautical Mile(s) 
                   NMAC       Near Midair Collision 
                   PA         Proximity Alert (TCAS I)  
                   PFD        Primary Flight Display 
                   QFE        Atmospheric pressure at aerodrome elevation 
                   QNH        Altimeter sub-scale setting to obtain elevation when on the ground 
                   RA         Resolution Advisory 
                   RAC        Resolution Advisory Complement 
                   RPAS       Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems 
                   RTCA       RTCA Inc. A USbAa-sed non-profit organisation that develops technical standards for 
                              regulatory authorities (formerly Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics) 
                   RVSM       Reduced Vertical Separation Minima 
                   SARPs      Standards and Recommended Practices 
                   sec        Second(s) 
                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017               83                           EUROCONTROL 
                   
                    SESAR      Single European Sky ATM Research Programme 
                    SKYbrary   A repository of safety knowledge related to ATM and aviation safety in general. 
                    SL         Sensitivity Level 
                    SSR        Secondary Surveillance Radar 
                    STCA       Short Term Conflict Alert 
                    TA         Traffic Advisory 
                    tau        Warning Time 
                    TAWS       Terrain Avoidance and Warning System 
                    TCAP       TCAS Alert Prevention 
                    TCAS       Traffic alert and Collision Avoidance System 
                    TVTHR      Time (Variable) Threshold – Reduced Time to Co-altitude Threshold 
                    UAS        Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
                    VFR        Visual Flight Rules 
                    VLJ        Very Light Jet(s) 
                    VMC        Visual Meteorological Conditions 
                    VSI        Vertical Speed Indicator 
                    XPNDR      Transponder 
                    ZTHR       Z Threshold – Vertical Threshold for Resolution Advisory 
                    ZTHRTA     Z Threshold – Vertical Threshold for Traffic Advisory 
                    
                   EUROCONTROL                              84                 ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                    
                                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
                                                   
                                                  ICAO Publications: 
                                                   
                                                                      ICAO Annex 2 – Rules of the Air (Tenth edition – 2005, amendment 45). 
                                                                       
                                                                      ICAO Annex 6 – Operation of Aircraft  -Part I - International Commercial Air Transport  –
                                                                      Aeroplanes (Tenth edition – 2016,). 
                                                                       
                                                                      ICAO Annex 10 – Aeronautical Telecommunications - Volume IV - Surveillance Radar and 
                                                                      Collision Avoidance Systems (Fifth edition – 2014). 
                                                                       
                                                                      ICAO Doc. 4444 – PANS-ATM – Procedures for Air Navigation Services – Rules of the Air and 
                                                                      Air Traffic Services (Sixteenth edition – 2016). 
                                                                       
                                                                      ICAO Doc. 8168 – PANS-OPS – Procedures for Air Navigation Services – Aircraft Operations - 
                                                                      Volume I - Flight Procedures (Fifth edition – 2006, amendment 7). 
                                                                       
                                                                      ICAO Doc. 9863 – Airborne Collision Avoidance System (ACAS) Manual (Seco neddition –
                                                                       2012). 
                                                   
                                                  RTCA Publications: 
                                                   
                                                                      RTCA DO-185B – Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for Traffic Alert and 
                                                                      Collision Avoidance System (TCAS II) Airborne Equipment59. 
                                                                       
                                                                      RTCA DO-300 – Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for Traffic Alert and 
                                                                      Collision Avoidance System (TCAS II) For TCAS II Hybrid Surveillance. 
                                                                       
                                                  EUROCAE Publications: 
                                                                       
                                                                      EUROCAE ED-143 – Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for Traffic Alert and 
                                                                                                                                                         60. 
                                                                      Collision Avoidance System II (TCAS II)
                                                                       
                                                                      EUROCAE ED-221 – MOPS for TCAS II Hybrid Surveillance. 
                                                                       
                                                                      EUROCAE ED-224 – Minimum Aviation System Performance Specification (MASPS) for Flight 
                                                                      Guidance System (FGS) coupled to ACAS. 
                                                   
                                                  FAA Publications: 
                                                   
                                                                      AC 20-151B  (Advisory Circular )–  Airworthiness Approval of Traffic Alert and Collision 
                                                                      Avoidance Systems (TCAS II), Versions 7.0 & 7.1 and Associated Mode S Transponders 
                                                                      TSO C119C (Technical Standard Order) – Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) 
                                                                      Airborne Equipment, TCAS II With Optional Hybrid Surveillance. 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                  59 Superseding DO-185A (version 7.0 MOPS). 
                                                   
                                                  60 Jointly published with RTCA and commensurate with DO-185B. 
                                                   
                                                  ACAS GUIDE December 2017                                                                                       85                                                                              EUROCONTROL 
                                                   
                                   AC 20-131A (Advisory Circular) – Airworthiness and Operational Approval of Traffic Alert and 
                                   Collision Avoidance Systems (TCAS II) and Mode S Transponders. 
                                    
                                   AC 120-55C Change 1 (Advisory Circular) – Air Carrier Operational Approval and Use of TCAS 
                                   II. 
                                    
                                   Introduction to TCAS II version 7.1 – 28 February 2011 
                          
                         European publications: 
                          
                                   EU-OPS-1  –  European Commission Regulation (common technical requiremeandn ts 
                                   administrative procedures applicable to commeralci transportation by aeroplane)  –available 
                                   on SKYbrary http://www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/818.pdf 
                                             Applicable sections: 
                                            EU-OPS 1.668  A: irborne collision avoidance system  av– ailable  on SKYbrary: 
                                                                                                               
                                             www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/818.pdf#search=1.668
                                            EU-OPS 1.398:  Use of airborne collision avoidance systm (Ae            CAS) –  available on 
                                                                                                                         
                                             SKYbrary: www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/818.pdf#search=1.398
                                              
                                    
                                   Acceptable Means of Compliance (AMC) and Guidance Material (GM) to -PCaATrt –, 
                                   Annex to ED Decision 2012/018/R, Initial issue 25 October 
                                        https://www.easa.europa.eu/system/files/dfu/Consolidated%20unofficial%20AMC-
                                   2012
                                   GM_Annex%20IV%20Part-CAT%20March%202017.pdf 
                                    
                                   ETSO C119C (European Technical Standard Order )– Traffic alert and Collision Avoidance 
                                   system (TCAS), Airborne Equipment, TCAS II 
                                   https://www.easa.europa.eu/download/etso/ETSO-C119c_CS-ETSO_5.pdf 
                                    
                                   COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1332/2011  –of 16 December 2011 laying down 
                                   common airspace usage requirements and operating procedures for airborne collision avoid ance
                                   published in the Official Journal of the European Union on 20 December 2011: 
                                                                                                                                    
                                   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:336:0020:0022:EN:PDF
                                    
                                   COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 2016/583 – of 15 April 2016 amending Regulation (EU) 
                                   No 1332/2011 laying down common airspace usage requirements and operating procedures for 
                                   airborne collision avoidancep ublished in the Official Journal of the European Union on 
                                   16 April 2016:  
                                   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0583&from=EN  
                                    
                                   EASA (European Aviation Safety Agency) Safety Information Bulletin 2013-11 – of 19 July 
                                   2013 (ACAS II – Manoeuvres based on Visual Acquisition of Traffic): 
                                   http://ad.easa.europa.eu/blob/SIB_201311_ACAS_II_Manoeuvres_Based_on_Visual_Acquisitio
                                   n_of_Traffic.pdf/SIB_2013-11_1  
                                    
                         EUROCONTROL                                             86                       ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                          
                   APPENDIX – RELEVANT ICAO PROVISIONS  
                    
                   Note: Extracts from ICAO documents are provided here foerr renceef  only and are current on 
                   1 February 2017 and are subject to change.  
                    
                   ANNEX 6 – PART I  
                   4.4.10 Aeroplane operating procedures for rates of climb and descent 
                    
                   Recommendation.— Unless otherwise specified in an air traffic control instruction, to avoid unnecessary 
                   airborne collision avoidance system (ACAS II) resolution advisories in aircraft at or approaching adjacent 
                   altitudes or flight levels, operators should specify procedures by which an aeroplane climbing or descending to 
                   an assigned altitude or flight level, especially with an autopilot engaged, may do so at a rate less than 8 m/sec 
                   or 1 500 ft/min (depending on the instrumentation available) throughout the last 300 m (1 000 ft) of climb or 
                   descent to the assigned level when the pilot is made aware of another aircraft at or approaching an adjacent 
                   altitude or flight level. 
                    
                   6.19 AEROPLANES REQUIRED TO BE EQUIPPED WITH AN AIRBORNE COLIONLI AS VOIDANCE SYSTEM 
                   (ACAS II) 
                    
                   6.19.1 All turbine-engined aeroplanes of a maximum certificated tak-oeff mass in excess of 5 700 kg or 
                   authorized to carry more than 19 passengers shall be equipped with an airborne collision avoidance 
                   system (ACAS II). 
                   6.19.2 Recommendation.— All aeroplanes should be equipped with an airborne collision avoidance system 
                   (ACAS II). 
                   6.19.3 An airborne collision avoidance system shall operate in accordance with the relevant provisions of 
                   Annex 10, Volume IV. 
                   ANNEX 10 – VOLUME IV 
                   4.3.5.3.1 New ACAS installations after 1 January 2014 shall monitor own aircraft’s vertical rate to verify 
                   compliance with the RA sense. If nonco- mpliance is detected, ACAS shall stop assuming compliance, 
                   and instead shall assume the observed vertical rate. 
                   Note 1.— This overcomes the retention of an RA sense that would work only if followed. The revised vertical 
                   rate assumption is more likely to allow the logic to select the opposite sense when it is consistent with the non-
                   complying aircraft’s vertical rate. 
                   Note 2.— Equipment complying with RTCA/DO-185 or DO-185A standards (also known as TCAS Version 6.04A 
                   or TCAS Version 7.0) do not comply with this requirement. 
                   Note 3.— Compliance with this requirement can be achieved through the implementation of traffic alert and 
                   collision avoidance system (TCAS) Version 7.1 as specified in RTCA/DO-185B or EUROCAE/ED-143. 
                    
                   4.3.5.3.2 Recommendation.— All ACAS should be compliant with the requirement in 4.3.5.3.1. 
                    
                   4.3.5.3.3 After 1 January 2017, all ACAS units shall comply with the requirements stated in 4.3.5.3.1. 
                                                 
                   ACAS GUIDE December 2017                 87                            EUROCONTROL 
                    
                        PANS-ATM – DOC. 4444  
                        15.7.3.1 The procedures to be applied for the provision of air traffic services to aircraft equipped with 
                        ACAS shall be identical to those applicable to no-nACAS equipped aircraft. In particular, the prevention 
                        of collisions, the establishment of appropriate separation and the information which might be provided 
                        in relation to conflicting traffic and to possible avoiding action shall conform with the normal ATS 
                        procedures and shall exclude consideration of aircraft capabilities dependent on ACAS equipment.  
                        15.7.3.2 When a pilot reports an ACAS resolution advisory (RA), the controller shall not attempt to modify 
                        the aircraft flight path until the pilot reports “Clear of Conflict”. 
                         
                        15.7.3.3 Once an aircraft departs from its ATC clearance or instruction in compliance with an RA, or a 
                        pilot reports an RA, the controller ceases to be responsible for providing separation between that 
                        aircraft and any other aircraft affected as a direct conuseencq e of the manoeuvre induced by the RA. 
                        The controller shall resume responsibility for providing separation for all the affected aircraft when: 
                        a) the controller acknowledges a report from the flight crew that the aircraft has resumed the current 
                        clearance; or 
                        b) the controller acknowledges a report from the flight crew that the aircraft is resuming the current 
                        clearance and issues an alternative clearance which is acknowledged by the flight crew. 
                        Note.  —  Pilots are required to report RAs which require adevi ation from the current ATC clearance or 
                        instruction (see PANS-OPS, Volume I, Part III, Section 3, Chapter 3, 3.2 c) 4)). This report informs the controller 
                        that a deviation from clearance or instruction is taking place in response to an ACAS RA. 
                         
                        15.7.3.4 Guidance on training of air traffic controllers in the application of ACAS events is contained in 
                        the Airborne Collision Avoidance System (ACAS) Manual (Doc 9863). 
                         
                        15.7.3.5 ACAS can have a significant effect on ATC. Therefore, the performance of ACAS in the ATC 
                        environment should be monitored.  
                         
                        15.7.3.6 Following a significant ACAS event, pilots and controllers should complete an air traffic incident 
                        report. 
                        Note 1. — The ACAS capability of an aircraft may not be known to air traffic controllers.  
                         
                        Phraseology 
                         
                        Para. 12.3.1.2 r- y 
                        ... after a flight crew starts to deviate from any ATC clearance or instruction to comply with an ACAS 
                        resolution advisory (RA) (Pilot and controller interchange): 
                                  PILOT:            TCAS RA; 
                                  ATC:              ROGER; 
                        ... after the response to an ACAS RA is completed and a return to the ATC clearance or instruction is 
                        initiated (Pilot and controller interchange): 
                                  PILOT:            CLEAR OF CONFLICT, RETURNING TO (assigned clearance); 
                                  ATC:              ROGER (or alternative instructions); 
                        … after the response to a nACAS RA is completed and the assigned ATC clearance or instruction has 
                        been resumed (Pilot and controller interchange): 
                                  PILOT:            CLEAR OF CONFLICT (assigned clearance) RESUMED; 
                                  ATC:              ROGER (or alternative instructions); 
                        … after an ATC clearance or instruction contradictory to the ACAS RA is received, the flight crew will 
                        follow the RA and inform ATC directly (Pilot and controller interchange): 
                                  PILOT:            UNABLE, TCAS RA; 
                                  ATC:              ROGER; 
                         
                        EUROCONTROL                                          88                      ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                         
                       PANS-OPS – DOC. 8168 (VOLUME I) 
                       Chapter 3 - OPERATION OF AIRBORNE COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEM (ACAS) EQUIPMENT 
                        
                       3.1 ACAS OVERVIEW 
                       3.1.1 The information provided by an ACAS is intended to assist pilots in the safe operation of aircraft by 
                       providing advice on appropriate action to reduce the risk of collision. This is achtihervouedgh   
                       resolution advisories (RAs), which propose manoeuvres, and through traffic advisories (TAs), which are 
                       intended to prompt visual acquisition and to act as a warning that an RA may follow. TAs indicate the 
                       approximate positions of intruding aircrat thf    at may later cause resolution advisories. RAs propose 
                       vertical manoeuvres that are predicted to increase or maintain separation from threatening aircraft. 
                       ACAS I equipment is only capable of providing TAs, while ACAS II is capable of providing both TAs and 
                       RAs. In this chapter, reference to ACAS means ACAS II. 
                        
                       3.1.2 ACAS indications shall be used by pilots in the avoidance of potential collisions, the enhancement 
                       of situational awareness, and the active search for, and visual acquisition of, conflicting traffic. 
                        
                       3.1.3 Nothing in the procedures specified in 3.2 hereunder shall prevent- pin-coilommats          nd from 
                       exercising their best judgement and full authority in the choice of the best course of action to resolve a 
                       traffic conflict or avert a potentia1 collision. 
                        
                       Note 1.— The ability of ACAS to fulfil its role of assisting pilots in the avoidance of potential collisions is 
                       dependent on the correct and timely response by pilots to ACAS indications. Operational experience has 
                       shown that the correct response by pilots is dependent on the effectiveness of the initial and recurrent training 
                       in ACAS procedures. 
                       Note 2.— The normal operating mode of ACAS is TA/RA. The oTAnly- mode of operation is used in certain 
                       aircraft performance limiting conditions caused byn- iflight failures or as otherwise promulgated by the 
                       appropriate authority. 
                       Note 3.— ACAS Training Guidelines for Pilots are provided in the Attachment, “ACAS Training Guidelines for 
                       Pilots”. 
                        
                       3.2 USE OF ACAS INDICATIONS 
                       The indications generated by ACAS shall be used by pilots in conformity with the following safety 
                       considerations: 
                       a) pilots shall not manoeuvre their aircraft in response to traffic advisories (TAs) only; 
                        
                       Note 1.— TAs are intended to alert pilots to the possibility of a resolution advisory (RA), to enhance situational 
                       awareness, and to assist in visual acquisition of conflicting traffic. However, visually acquir edtraffic may not 
                       be the same traffic causing a TA. Visual perception of an encounter may be misleading, particularly at night. 
                       Note 2.— The above restriction in the use of TAs is due to the limited bearing accuracy and to the difficulty in 
                       interpreting altitude rate from displayed traffic information. 
                        
                       b) on receipt of a TA, pilots shall use all available information to prepare for appropriate action if an RA 
                       occurs; and 
                       c) in the event of an RA, pilots shall: 
                       1) respond immediately by following the RA as indicated, unless doing so would jeopardize the safety of 
                       the aeroplane; 
                       Note 1.— Stall warning, wind shear, and ground proximity warning system alerts have precedence over ACAS.  
                       Note 2.—  Visually acquired traffic may not be the same traffic causing an RA. Visual perception of an 
                       encounter may be misleading, particularly at night. 
                       2) follow the RA even if there is a conflict between the RA and an air traffic control (ATC) instruction to 
                       manoeuvre; 
                       3) not manoeuvre in the opposite sense to an RA;  
                       ACAS GUIDE December 2017                            89                                   EUROCONTROL 
                        
                        Note.— In the case of an ACA-SACAS coordinated encounter, the RAs complement each other in order to 
                        reduce the potential for collision. Manoeuvres, or lack of manoeuvres, that result in vertical rates opposite to 
                        the sense of an RA could result in a collision with the intruder aircraft. 
                         
                        4) as soon as possible, as permitted by flight crew workload, notify the appropriate ATC unit of any RA 
                        which requires a deviation from the current ATC instruction or clearance; 
                        Note.— Unless informed by the pilot, ATC does not know when ACAS issues RAs. It is possible for ATC to issue 
                        instructions that are unknowingly contrary to ACAS RA indications. Therefore, it is important that ATC be 
                        notified when an ATC instruction or clearance is not being followed because it conflicts with an RA. 
                         
                        5) promptly comply with any modified RAs; 
                        6) limit the alterations of the flight path to the minimum extent necessary to comply with the RAs; 
                        7) promptly return to the terms of the ATC instruction or clearance when the conflict is resolved; and 
                        8) notify ATC when returning to the current clearance. 
                        Note 1.— Procedures in regard to ACAS-equipped aircraft and the phraseology to be used for th enotification 
                        of manoeuvres in response to a resolution advisory are contained in the PA-NATMS   (Doc 4444), Chapters 15 
                        and 12 respectively. 
                        Note 2.— Where aircraft can provide automatic following of an RA when the autopilot is engaged supported 
                        by a link between ACAS and autopilot, the operational procedures in items 4) and 8) still apply. 
                         
                        3.3 HIGH VERTICAL RATE (HVR) ENCOUNTERS 
                        Pilots should use appropriate procedures by which an aeroplane climbing or descending to an assigned 
                        altitude or flight level, especially with an autopilot engaged, may do so at a rate less than 8 m/s (or 1 500 
                        ft/min) throughout the last 300 m (or 1 000 ft) of climb or descent to the assigned altitude or flight level 
                        when the pilot is made aware of another aircraft at or approaching an adjacent altitude or flight level, 
                        unless otherwise instructed by ATC. Some aircraft have auto-flight systems with the capability to detect 
                        the presence of such aircraft and adjust their vertical rate accordingly. These procedures are intended to 
                        avoid unnecessary ACAS II resolution advisories in aircraft at or approaching adjacent altitudes or flight 
                        levels. For commercial operations, these procedures should be specified by the operator. […] 
                         
                        AIRBORNE COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEM MANUAL – DOC. 9863 
                        5.2.1.14 If an RA manoeuvre is inconsistent with the current ATC clearance, pilots shall follow the RA. 
                         
                        5.2.3. The following ACAS good operating practices have been identified during the use of ACAS 
                        throughout the world. 
                         
                        5.2.3.1 To preclude unnecessary transponder interrogations and possible interference with ground radar 
                        surveillance systems, ACAS should not be activated (TA-only or TA/RA mode) until taking the active 
                        runway for departure and should be deactivated immediately after clearing the runway after landing. To 
                        facilitate surveillance of surface movements, it is necessary to select a mode in which the Mode S 
                        transponder can nevertheless squitter and respond to discrete interrogations while taxiing to and from 
                        the gate. Operators must ensure that procedures exist for pilots and crews to be able to select the 
                        operating mode where ACAS is disabled, but the Mode S transponder remains active. 
                         
                        5.2.3.2 During flight, ACAS traffic displays should be used to assist in visual acquisition. Displays that have 
                        a range selection capability should be used in an appropriate range setting for the phase of flight. For 
                        example, use minimum range settings in the terminal area and longer ranges for climb/descent and 
                        cruise, as appropriate.  
                         
                        5.2.3.3 The normal operating mode of ACAS is TA/RA. It may be appropriate to operate ACAS in the T-A
                        only mode only in conditions where States have approved specific procedures permitting aircraft to 
                        operate in close proximity or in the event of particular-f liginht failures or performance limiting 
                        EUROCONTROL                                         90                      ACAS GUIDE December 2017 
                         
                   conditions as specified by the Aeroplane Flight Manual or operator. It should be noted that operating in 
                   TA-only mode eliminates the major safety benefit of ACAS.  
                    
                   5.2.3.3.1 Operating in TA/RA mode and then not following an RAs i potentially dangerous. If an aircraft 
                   does not intend to respond to an RA and operates in the T-Aonly mode, other ACAS-equipped aircraft 
                   operating in TA/RA mode will have maximum flexibility in issuing RAs to resolve encounters.  
                    
                   6.3.1.5 When an RA is issued, pilots are expected to respond immediately to the RA unless doing so 
                   would jeopardize the safe operation of the flight. This means that aircraft will at times manoeuvre 
                   contrary to ATC instructions or disregard ATC instructions. The following points receive emphasis during 
                   pilot training: 
                   a) do not manoeuvre in a direction opposite to that indicated by the RA because this may result i  n a
                   collision; 
                   b) inform the controller of the RA as soon as permitted by flight crew workload after responding t othe 
                   RA. There is no requirement to make this notification prior to initiating the RA response; 
                   c) be alert for the removal of RAs or the weakening of RAs so that deviations from a cleared altitud aere 
                   minimized; 
                   d) if possible, comply with the controller’s clearance, e.g. turn to intercept an airway or localizer, atthe   
                   same time as responding to an RA; and 
                   e) when the RA event is completed, promptly return to the previous ATC clearance or instructio n or
                   comply with a revised ATC clearance or instruction. 
                    
                   A7.1.2 During a possible Air Policing Mission (hot intercept), civil aircraft might perform evasive 
                   manoeuvres, which could be interpreted as non-friendly action by the Interceptor Pilot and could lead 
                   to negative consequences stemming from the reaction of the Interceptor Pilot. 
                                                               
                   A7.1.3 From a military point of view there are two main scenarios to be discussed: 
                   — a demonstrative intercept with a military escort mission; or 
                   — a covert unexpected approach towards a selected target. 
                    
                   A7.1.4 Currently, there is no provision to distinguish between these two kinds of intercept. In addition, 
                   safe situation control on the ground can be improved in various regions of the world using capabilities 
                   implemented with Mode S. 
                    
                                                            ***** 
                   ACAS GUIDE December 2017                 91                            EUROCONTROL 
                    
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
              
             Further information: 
             acas@eurocontrol.int 
             www.eurocontrol.int/acas 
              
                                                         
              
             December 2017 – © European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) 
              
             This document is published by EUROCONTROL for information purposes. It may be copied in whole or 
             in part provided that EUROCONTROL is mentioned as a source and to the extent justified by the no-n
             commercial use (not for sale). The information in this docunmt me ay not be modified without prior 
             written permission from EUROCONTROL. The use of this document is at user's sole risk and 
             responsibility. EUROCONTROL expressly disclaims any and all warranties with respect to the document, 
             expressed or implied.  
              
             Additionally, the disclaimer available under www.eurocontrol.int/acas
                                            applies to the information 
             contained in this publication. 
                                               
