                                      
                                               
          
          
          
          
          
                           Safety in Hotels, 
                                      
                          Guest Houses and 
                                      
                          Bed and Breakfast  
                                      
                            Establishments 
                                      
                                         
           
           
          This booklet is designed to help you consider the risks to 
          health and safety that may arise in the course of your business 
          and gives you advice on how to reduce or minimise risk.  
          Where appropriate, links are provided to further information 
          on particular subjects. 
           
          Different types of hotels and guest houses/B&Bs will have 
          different risks.  Please look at the following list of risks to see 
          which apply to your busi  Remember, there may beness.                  
          other risks not mentioned which may apply to your particular 
          business and you should ensure that you include these. 
           
              Asbestos 
              Bathroom Safety 
              Bedroom Safety 
              Cellar Safety 
              Chemical Safety 
              Gas Safety 
              Health & Fitness Centres 
              Kitchen Safety 
              Legionella 
              Lifts 
              Manual Handling 
              Portable Electrical Appliances 
              Swimming Pool and Spa Safety 
              VDU Safety 
              Window Safety 
              Violence at Work 
                                          
                Asbestos  
                The Control of Asbest require you as the person os Regulations 2006
                responsible for the premises, the dutyholder, to manage asbes. This                     tos
                means you must carry out an assto identify if asbestos, is presentessment     
                in your building. If asbestos containing materials are identified, then you 
                must assess their condition and put in place a plan to manage them so that 
                there is no risk to the health of employees or anyone else that uses the 
                premises.  
                 http://www.hse.gov.uk/asbestos   
                http://www.hse.gov.uk/asbestos/campaign/duty.htm 
                 
                Bathroom Safety  
                Slipping over is a common accident in bathroom areas. 
                     Slip mats and grab rails can help to prevent slipping accidents 
                      especially where showers are located over baths.  
                     Floor surfaces should be reasonably non-slip.  
                Consider water temperature so as to prevent risk of scalding but at the same 
                time make sure legionella bacteria are controlled (See Legionella below) 
                   
                  Bedroom Safety  
                  Common problems include: -   
                    Tripping - over bedding, carpets and furniture  
                    The kettle - can the lead be pulled by a child? Will the steam affect 
                     any electrical appliances?  
                    Protruding shelves or television brackets  
                   Openable windows  
                    Stability of furniture and fittings  
                 
                                                          
                       Cellar Safety  
                       Manual handling of deliveries can be a significant problem in cellars.  
                          Staff should be trained in manual handling procedures and where 
                            possible it should be avoided.  
                           A manual handling assessment should be made.  
                          Any gas cylinders should be appropriately stored and restrained. 
                            Remember empty cylinders are just as dangerous as full cylinders.  
                            Therefore, the installation of carbon dioxide (CO2) monitors in cellars 
                            are recommended.  
                          Chemical cleaners, such as beer line cleaners, can be extremely 
                            corrosive. A COSHH assessment (see Chemical Safety) will need to 
                            be carried out and any necesprotective clothing should be sary 
                            provided and worn.  
                          Adequate guarding or other equally effective measures should be in 
                            place to prevent fall from height via cellar drops, flaps or hatches.  
                          Risk assessments should consider the risks posed to individuals 
                            working in confined space (e.g. subterranean cellars, overstocked 
                            cellars, asphyxiation and lone working).  Adequate control measures 
                            should be implemented to reduce such risks.  
                      
                       Chemical Safety  
                       You are likely to use chemical products e.g. for cleaning, beer line cleaner 
                       (see Cellar Safety above) and others, which are potentially hazardous. 
                       Under the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 
                       (COSHH) (as amended) you must make sure the risks from hazardous 
                       substances are controlled. Safety information is normally provided on the 
                       label or on a separate Material Safety Data sheet (MSDS). Check that 
                       staff are taking the necessary precautions in accordance with the product 
                       label or MSDS 
                       http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/cais22.pdf 
                        
                       Fire Safety  
                       For information on means of escape in emergency, fire fighting 
                       appliances, and fire alarm and detection systems, contact the local Fire 
                       Safety Service, which for Brighton and Hove is East Sussex Fire and 
                       Rescue Service  
                       http://www.esfrs.org/businessSafety/contactUs.shtml    
                                                                              
               Gas Safety  
               Remember all gas appliances must receive annual safety inspection by a 
               Gas Safe registered installer.  
               http://www.gassaferegister.co.uk/  
                
               Health and Fitness Centres  
               It is important that users are supervised and receive adequate  
               instruction on any equipment that they use. Equipment must be  
               correctly installed, properly maintained and inspected regularly.  
                
               Kitchen Safety 
               Particular hazards in the kitchen include slips and trips, manual handling, 
               cuts from equipment and broken glass, contact with hot surfaces or 
               liquids, and work – related ct dermatitis.  See link below forontac        
               guidance on controlling the risk.  
               http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/catering1.pdf 
                
               Legionella 
               Legionella bacteria can cause a potentially fatal form of pneumonia called 
               Legionnaire’s Disease.  They are generally present in water but do not 
               cause a problem unless the conditions allow them to multiply.  Check your 
               system for supplying hot and cold water in your premises and ensure that 
               you are minimising the risk of legionella multiplying.  The leaflet below can 
               help you.  
               http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg376.pdf 
                 
               Lifts  
               Passenger lifts and equipment or food lifts must be inspected 
               regularly by a competent person, under the requirements of  
               The Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment Regulations 1998.  
               The law requires that all lifts when in use should be thoroughly examined:  
                 After substantial and significant changes are made.  
                 After every 6 months if the lift is used at anytime to carry people and 
                   every 12 months if it only carries loads, or in accordance with an 
                   examination scheme; and  
                                                  
                             Following ‘exceptional circumstances’ such as damage to, or failure 
                                  of, the lift, long periods out of use or a major change in operating 
                                  conditions which are likely to affect the integrity of the equipment.  
                          http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg339.pdf 
                           
                          Manual Handling  
                          Manual handling can be a significant issue in hotels. Consider tasks such as: 
                          receiving deliveries, stackives, lng shelifting full pots and pans and 
                          dishwasher trays, carrying pilesplates, bending into deep fat fryers to  of 
                          clean them, making beds, and vacuuming. 
                          Injuries may happen as a result of only one serious incident, but more often 
                          they are a result of stress and strain over a long period. Lifting and carrying 
                          heavy items is a major cause of bacpain, while forceful or repetitive k 
                          activities and poor posture are linked to upper limb injuries. 
                          What can be done? 
                                  Assess all working areas to identify the risks and in particular to 
                                   determine if lifting and carrying can be prevented.  
                                  Allow appropriate rest breaks and consider varying work tasks where 
                                   possible. 
                                  Use mechanical aids wherever possible such as four-wheel-trolleys or 
                                   sack trucks and ensure staff receive instruction on how to use aids. 
                                  Ensure staff are properly trained for the task. 
                              http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg143.pdf 
                                
                         Pests 
                         As in domestic premises, pests such as bedbugs, fleas,  
                         mice and rats can be a problem.  The key is to keep good  
                         standards of hygiene throughout the premises and call out  
                         a professional pest control company as soon as there are  
                         signs of problems. Bedbugs can be very difficult to eradicate  
                         and an infestation usually means removing the mattresses  
                         and stripping out a room; follow the advice of your pest  
                         control company.  
                          
                          
                          
                                                                                             
                     Portable Electrical Appliances  
                     In hotel rooms, portable electrical appliances such as hairdryers, kettles, irons 
                     and televisions require certain c be made to ensure that they are hecks to
                     maintained in safe working order. Regular inspection and testing is important 
                     as these items can be subject to much wear and tear. The following link will 
                     help you: 
                     http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg237.pdf 
                      
                     Swimming Pool and Spa Safety  
                     You should be considering the following points: -  
                           Safe storage of chemicals (COSHH).  
                           Adequate training of staff.  
                           Adequate supervision of the pool by lifeguards.  
                           Adequate water disinfection.  
                           Regular daily testing of the water and recording such tests.  
                           Adequate signage for warnings.  
                           All facilities should be protected against unauthorised entry or use.  
                        http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/priced/hsg179.pdf  
                        
                     VDU Safety  
                     If you have staff spending significant time working at a VDU such as a 
                     receptionist, you need to ensure that the work station is comfortable and that 
                     measures are in place to minimise strain to the bodyespecially,   the upper 
                     limbs and eyes.   
                     http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg36.pdf 
                      
                     Window Safety  
                     When considering window and glass safety, the main considerations should 
                     be:-    
                           Are windows cleaned safely by staff and contractors?  
                           Where windows form part of a door, are they made of safety glass?  
                          Is there a danger that a person could fall out of a window? (the 
                            bottom edge of windows should be at least 800 mm above floor level 
                            unless there is a barrier present to prevent falls)  
                                                                              
                              Where there is a danger of fallingout of a window at he                               ight, devices 
                                should be provided to prevent the window opening too far. 
                                Remember beds and other furniture may enable children to gain 
                                access to open windows.  
                            http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg212.htm 
                         
                        Violence at Work 
                        You and your staff deal directly with the public and may be at  
                        risk of violent or aggressive behaviour. 
                        The Health and Safety Executive’s definition of work-related  
                        violence is:  
                         
                        ‘any incident, in which a person is abused, threatened or assaulted in 
                        circumstances relating to their work’. 
                         
                        In a hotel setting, risk could arise from lone working, working out of normal 
                        office hours, or dealing with intoxicated or angry customers. 
                         
                        Violence at work is unacceptable and staff must be protected from the risk of 
                        violence by making sure certain measures are in place.   
                         
                        For further information please see our booklet Violence at Work; Guidance for 
                        businesses in Brighton and Hove  
                        http://www.brighton-
                        hove.gov.uk/downloads/bhcc/licence_applications/VIOLENCE_AT_WORK_le
                        aflet_Aug09.pdf 
                         
                         
                        http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/violindx.htm 
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                                                                         
         
         
         
         
        General Health and Safety 
         
        If you need any other information, the Health and Safety Executive’s website 
        http://www.hse.gov.uk covers all aspects of health and safety legislation and 
        specific guidance for particular types of business.  
         
         
         
         
         
         
                                
         
        We would like to acknowledge the Environmental Health Department of 
        Bournemouth Borough Council in the production of this booklet. 
                              
