                              JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                               
                              Part 2                                                                         Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           er 
                                                                                        Leaflet 26 
                                                                                                           
                                      Medical Diagnostic X-ray Equipment 
                                                                                                           
                              CONTENTS 
                               
                              Paragraph 
                               1 Scope 
                               2 Statutory requirements 
                                Duties 
                                  3          Commanding Officer and Head of Establishment (CO/HoE) 
                                  4          Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) 
                                  5          Radiation Protection Supervisor (RPS) 
                                  6          Practitioners, operators and referrers 
                               7  Employees 
                               
                              Table                                                                                                                                                   
                                 1 Hazard 
                                 2        Legal and MOD mandatory requirements 
                               
                              Annex 
                              A  Specific requirements and recommendations for medical diagnostic x-ray equipment 
                              B  Content of employer’s written procedures for medical exposures 
                               
                              NOTE 
                                      The instructions in this Leaflet apply to MOD units and establishments; they do not apply within 
                                      Ministry of Defence Hospital its where responsibility for healUn                                  th and safety in general and 
                                      radiation safety in the particular context of thi pubslication, rests with the Chief Executive of the 
                                      NHS Trust concerned. 
                               
                              Scope 
                              1  This Leaflet covers medical diagnostic X-ray equipment (including fluoroscopes).  The 
                              following information describes the requirements for keeping and using such equipment.  
                              Summaries of the radiation risks and regulatory requirements for such equipment are included 
                              in the Annexes of this Leaflet.  
                               
                              Statutory Requirements  
                              2       In addition to the general requirements of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 and 
                              the Management of Health and  Regulations 1999Safety at Work, the following specific 
                              legislation applies directly: 
                                    •             Ionising Radiations Regulations 1999 (IRR99);   
                                    •             Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposures) Regulations 2000 (IRMER2000).  
                               
                                  
                                Leaflet 26   
                                                                                                     Page 1 
                    JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                     
                    Part 2                                              Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                         er 
                    Duties 
                    Commanding Officer and Head of Establishment (CO/HoE) 
                    3    The CO/HoE has a duty to the Secretary of State, and a personal responsibility, to protect 
                    the environment and secure the health, safety and welfare of their staff at work.  The CO/HoE 
                    is also required to protect persons not in MOD employment (e.g. members of the public) 
                    against risks to their health and safety arisingfrom the MOD work activities.  Th                                        is includes 
                    radiation safety.  In regard to equipment used for medical exposure, it must be ensured that 
                    such equipment is designed, installed and maintained so far as is reasonably practicable to 
                    restrict the exposure of any person undergoing a medical exposure to the extent that this is 
                    compatible with the intended purpose.  The CO/HoE’s authority (but not responsibility) for 
                    radiation safety management arrangements may be delegated to appropriate personnel, such 
                    as a Radiation Safety Officer (RSO). 
                    Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) 
                    4    The Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) is to ensure that they are familiar with the specific 
                    radiation hazards at their unit or establishment, and that adequate radiation protection 
                    arrangements are made to minimise theation hazar radid including the drawing up of local 
                    orders for radiation safety and the issue of local rules, instructions and procedures. 
                    Radiation Protection Supervisor (RPS) 
                    5    The RPS is to ensure that X-ray equipment is correctly used in accordance with local 
                    orders for radiation safety including local rules, instructions and procedures.  The RPS is also 
                    to ensure that reporting procedures for any incidents are followed (see Annex A to this leaflet 
                    and also Leaflet 14).  The RPS is normally the superintendent radiographer within the 
                    department, and should be appropriately trained for the role.  This is normally through 
                    successful completion of the RPS (X-ray) course at HMS Sultan, details of which can be 
                    obtained from the RPA.  This training should be refreshed at least every five years. 
                    Practitioners, operators and referrers 
                    6  Practitioners, operators and referrers have specific duties under IRMER2000. Further 
                    information on these duties is contained within Annex A. 
                    Employees 
                    7  It is the responsibility of all employees to ensure that X-ray equipment and personal 
                    protective equipment is used correctly and not deliberately misused or interfered with and that 
                    work is carried out in accordance with local orders, instructions and procedures.  Any incidents 
                    are to be immediately reported to the RPS. 
                     
                    Hazard 
                                                              Table 1 Hazard 
                         Radiation type        Emitted                           Comments 
                     Alpha                        8       
                     Beta   Direct                8       
                            Bremsstrahlung        8       
                     Gamma                        8       
                        
                      Leaflet 26   
                                                                  Page 2 
                    JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                     
                    Part 2                                               Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                             er 
                                                          X-ray sets generate an in beam exposure hazard.  In addition, 
                     X-rays                       9       radiation from X-ray head leakage and scatter from the beam 
                                                          may affect areas around the X-ray head and beam. 
                     Neutrons                      8       
                     
                    Legal and MoD Mandatory Requirements 
                                               Table 2 Legal and MOD mandatory requirements 
                     Requirement Applicable                                   Comments                        Related 
                                                                                                              Leaflet* 
                     HSE authorisation             8          
                     HSE notification              9         3 
                     Environment agencies          8                                                               
                     notification** 
                     Risk assessment               9         2 
                     Restriction of exposure       9        Restriction of exposure is addressed in Leaflet 4   4, 16 
                                                            and local orders in Leaflet 16. 
                                                            PPE is covered in general in Leaflet 4.  See also 
                     PPE                           9        Annex A of this leaflet for specific guidance for     4 
                                                            medical PPE. 
                     Maintenance of                         Tests for correct function of: mains on and 
                     radiation engineering         9        exposure indication, automatic exposure               4 
                     controls                               termination at end of set time and on release of 
                                                            exposure button; room warning lights. 
                     Contingency plans             9        See Leaflet 40                                       40 
                                                            Designated areas are required and are covered in 
                     Designated areas              9        general in Leaflet 4.  See Annex A of this leaflet    4 
                                                            for detailed guidance.  
                     Monitoring                    8          
                                                            See Annex A of Leaflet 26 for IRMER2000 
                     Training for users            9        training requirements and Leaflet 15 for RPS and     15 
                                                            user training requirements. 
                                                            See Leaflet 16 for guidance on the requirements 
                     Local orders                  9        of local orders and the requirements of IRR99 for    16 
                                                            local rules. 
                     Appointed person              9        RPS required                                          3 
                     Storage                       8          
                                                            X-ray equipment to be recorded on Dstl Annual 
                     Accounting                    9        Holdings Return (copy retained for 1 year) and for    9 
                                                            IRMER2000 purposes, see Annex A of Leaflet 26. 
                     Leak testing                  8          
                                                            Whole body dosimeters are to be worn by staff 
                                                            routinely involved with radiology procedures.  It 
                     Personal dosimetry            9        may also be necessary to monitor doses to the         6 
                                                            extremities/thyroid/eye depending on the type and 
                                                            amount of X-ray work being carried out. 
                     Reporting procedures          9        See Leaflet 14 and Annex A of this leaflet for       14 
                                                            further guidance on the reporting of incidents. 
                     Transport                     8          
                     Disposal                      9        Return to stores.                                      
                     Sale/Transfer                 9          
                     Ionising Radiation 
                     (Medical Exposure)            9        See Annexes of this leaflet.                          - 
                     Regulations (IRMER 
                     2000) 
                     
                        
                      Leaflet 26   
                                                                   Page 3 
            JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
             
            Part 2                         Octob2014                                                                                                                   er 
            *JSP 392, unless otherwise stated 
            **Environment Agency (EA) for England and Wales, Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) for Scotland and 
            Environment and Heritage Service for Northern Ireland (EHSNI). 
                
              Leaflet 26   
                                       Page 4 
          JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
           
          Part 2                   Octob2014                                                                                          er 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
                         This page is intentionally blank 
              
            Leaflet 26   
                               Page 5 
                              JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                               
                              Part 2                                                                         Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           er 
                                                                                      Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                                                                                                           
                                   Specific Requirements and Recommendations for Use of Medical 
                                                                           Diagnostic X-ray Equipment 
                                                                                                           
                              CONTENTS 
                               
                              Paragraph 
                                  1      Radiation safety assessment for new or refurbished facilities 
                                  2      Acceptance testing of new x-ray equipment 
                                  5      Critical examination and design of new x-ray facilities 
                                  6      Controlled and supervised areas 
                               9 Exposure protocols 
                                12       Practitioners, operators and referrers 
                               15  Training 
                                18       Employer’s procedures for patient protection 
                               19  Referral criteria 
                                20       Quality assurance and patient dose assessment 
                                22       Personal protective equipment 
                                25       Protection of patients 
                                27       X-ray equipment records 
                                28       Comforter and carer 
                                30       Reporting procedures including those for patient doses much greater than intended 
                               
                              References 
                              A       Medical and Dental Guidance Notes, Prepared by Institute of Physics and Engineering in 
                              Medicine, 2002 ISBN 1 903613 09 4 
                              B       Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations 2000 
                              C       Making the Best Use of Clinical Radiology Services, Referral Guidelines, Seventh Edition, 
                              2012  The Royal College of Radiologists.
                              D  Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine (IPEM) Report 91, Recommended 
                              Standards for the Routine Performance Testing of Diagnostic X-ray Imaging Systems 2005. 
                              E        Doses to Patients from Radiographic and Fluoroscopic X-ray Imaging Procedures in the 
                              UK – 2010 Review HPA-CRCE-034 (2012) 
                               
                              Radiation Safety Assessment for New or Refurbished Facilities 
                              1       For new or refurbished X-ray facilities the RPA is to be consulted at the design stage to 
                              ensure that design of the facility, including any shielding required, is sufficient to keep doses to 
                              personnel as low as reasonably practicable.  General guidance on design of radiology facilities 
                              is given in Reference A. 
                               
                               
                               
                               
                               
                                                                                                                                                          Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                                                                                                     Page 1 
                    JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                     
                    Part 2                                               Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                               er 
                    Acceptance Testing of New X-Ray Equipment 
                    2  Acceptance tests are to be carried out as advised by the RPA on all newly installed 
                    medical X-ray equipment and when an X-ray tube is replaced to ensure that radiological 
                    functions are satisfactory and to specification. 
                    3  Medical X-ray sets are to be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with 
                    British Standard 60601.  Guidance on design, construction and installation of medical X-ray 
                    sets is given in Reference A. 
                    4    All new installed X-ray equipment is to be fitted with a dose area product (DAP) meter. 
                     
                    Critical Examination and Design of New X-Ray Facilities 
                     
                    5    A critical radiation safety examination including an assessment of the adequacy of room 
                    shielding is to be carried out as advised by the RPA on all new or structurally modified X-ray 
                    rooms prior to being brought into routine use. 
                     
                    Controlled and Supervised Areas 
                     
                    6    General requirements relating to controlled and supervised areas are contained in Leaflet 
                    4.  
                    7    A dedicated X-ray room containing installed X-ray equipment is designated as a controlled 
                    radiation area during exposures. 
                    8    For mobile X-ray sets, the controlled radiation area extends in the direction of the X-ray 
                    beam until the beam is sufficiently attenuated by distance or shielding (e.g. solid floor or wall) 
                    and out to 3 metres in all other directions. 
                     
                    Exposure Protocols 
                     
                    9    Written protocols are to be in place for each type of standard radiological practice and for 
                    each type of X-ray equipment.  For radiographequipment this will iny                 volve noting exposure 
                    factors, focus to film distance, grid use and automatic exposure control (AEC) use as 
                    appropriate for each type of examination.  For fluoroscopy equipment the protocol is to include, 
                    e.g. collimation, magnification and dose settings. Where exposure settings are programmed 
                    into the console, these are to match the values in the exposure chart.  Exposure settings are 
                    normally recorded in the form of an exposure chart, which is to be signed and dated by a 
                    responsible person. 
                    10  After each examination, a record of exposure factors, DAP meter reading or exposure 
                    time is to be made in the patient’s notes. 
                    11  In the case of fluoroscopic devices, viewing facilities are to be provided which do not 
                    permit direct vision of the fluoroscopy screen. 
                     
                     
                     
                                                                                                       Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                                                                   Page 2 
                        JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                         
                        Part 2                                                         Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         er 
                        Practitioners, Operators and Referrers 
                         
                        12  Reference B requires that each individual medical exposure is justified by an IRMER 
                        practitioner and any practical aspect asso with the ciated exposure carried out by an IRMER 
                        operator.  
                        13  In MOD medical facilities, the role of IRMER practitioner and responsibility for justifying 
                        medical X-ray exposures normally lies with DCA Radiology.  Justification is effected through 
                        radiography protocols and guidelines issued by DCA Radiology and implemented by 
                        authorisation of the radiographer for each medical exposure.  
                        14  Requests for a radiological examination are initiated by the referrer i.e. any registered 
                        medical or dental practitioner or other health professional who is entitled to refer individuals for 
                        medical exposure to an IRMER practitioner. 
                         
                        Training 
                         
                        15  Adequate training in the radiation protection of patients, as defined at Reference B, is 
                        required for IRMER practitioners and IRMER operators.  Adequate training is obtained during 
                        professional training and qualification, or a MOD recognised course together with practical 
                        experience, mentoring and continuing education and training as appropriate. 
                        16  In most circumstances, adequate training will be met by satisfying the requirements of the 
                        appropriate professional bodies, i.e. the Royal College of Radiologists and the College of 
                        Radiographers. 
                        17  Each establishment or unit is to maintain a register of adequate training for IRMER 
                        practitioners and IRMER operators providing details and dates of training undertaken. 
                         
                        Employer’s Procedures for Patient Protection 
                         
                        18  Written standard operating procedures for the radiation protection of patients are to be 
                        provided.  The written procedures are to include the matters set out at Annex B and are to be 
                        signed by the Head of Establishment.   
                         
                        Referral Criteria 
                         
                        19 Referral criteria for medical exposures, including information on radiation doses to 
                        patients, are to be made available to those health professionals who refer patients for 
                        radiological examination.  In MOD medical Xray departments, referra-                                   l criteria normally take 
                        the form of the RCR Guidelines at Reference C. 
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                                                                                                          Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                                                                                Page 3 
                     JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                      
                     Part 2                                                 Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er 
                     Quality Assurance and Patient Dose Assessment 
                      
                     20  All units and establishments are to operate a quality assurance (QA) programme for 
                     medical X-ray, film processing and CR equipment.  The QA programme is to include routine 
                     equipment tests carried out by department staff and annual/biennial tests by medical 
                     physicists.  Guidance on QA tests is provided at Reference D or may be obtained from the 
                     RPA.  
                     21  The QA programme is to include an assessment of radiation doses received by patients 
                     from different types of examination.  This will normally be carried out by the RPA/physicist on 
                     the basis of exposure information provided by the department.  Patient doses will be used for 
                     comparison with diagnostic reference levels (DRLs) such as the national DRLs available at 
                     Reference E. 
                      
                     Personal Protective Equipment 
                      
                     22  X-ray personal protective equipment (PPE) for staff includes aprons, gloves and thyroid 
                     shields incorporating lead to reduce radiation exposure during X-ray examinations.  This PPE 
                     is not designed to provide protection from the primary beam, but only from scattered radiation 
                     and that transmitted through the patient. 
                     23  Guidance on specific requirements for PPE is given in Reference A. 
                     24  Each piece of X-ray PPE is to have its own identifying number.  Gloves and aprons are to 
                     be visually examined at 3-monthly intervals and radiographically examined at least every 
                     12 months for the determination of deterioration or reduction in shielding effectiveness.  
                     Records of examinations are to be kept for 2 years.  
                      
                     Protection of Patients 
                      
                     25  Radiation doses to patients are to be as low as reasonably practicable in accordance with 
                     the intended clinical purpose.  
                     26  Notices are to be displayed requesting female patients to inform radiographers if they 
                     suspect or know that they are pregnant.  
                     27 The patient record is to be annotated to confirm that each exposure has been 
                     justified/authorised and that evaluation of each radiograph has taken place. 
                      
                     X-ray Equipment Records 
                      
                     28  All units and establishments are to maintain the following records for X-ray equipment: 
                              •      An inventory of equipment including the name of manufacturer, model number, 
                                  serial number or other unique identifier, year of manufacture and year of 
                                  installation; 
                              •      A record of all equipment defects, maintenance and QA tests.  
                      
                                                                                                          Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                                                                     Page 4 
           JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
            
           Part 2                       Octob2014                                                                                                         er 
           Comforter and Carer 
            
           29  Where it is necessary for a patient to be supported during a medical exposure, a record of 
           persons acting as supporters is to be maintained. 
           30  The supporter is preferably to be an adult relative or friend of the patient and must not be 
           pregnant.  The supporter must be adequately protected from exposure to X-rays during the 
           examination. 
            
           Reporting Procedures Including Those for Patient Doses Much 
           Greater Than Intended 
            
           31  Requirements for the reporting and investigation of radiation accidents, incidents and 
           occurrences are given in Leaflet 14. 
           32  Reporting procedures for a persong a medical exposure who receives a n undergoi
           radiation dose that is much greater than intended as a result of a defect or malfunction in 
           equipment are given at Leaflet 14 Annex G.  
           33  Reporting procedures for a persong a medical exposure who receives a n undergoi
           radiation dose that is much greater than intended as a result of clinical error are equivalent to 
           those given at Leaflet 14 Annex G except that the external body to be notified is the Care 
           Quality Commission (not the Health and Safety Executive). 
           34  Patient doses deemed to be much greater than intended vary from 1.5 to 20 times the 
           intended dose depending on the type of examination.  Details are provided in the department’s 
           employer’s procedures for patient protection or from the RPA. 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
                                                       Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                                    Page 5 
          JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
           
          Part 2                   Octob2014                                                                                          er 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
                         This page is intentionally blank 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
                                                Leaflet 26 Annex A 
                               Page 6 
                  JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
                   
                  Part 2                                          Octob2014                                                                                                                                                                                       er 
                                                   Leaflet 26 Annex B 
                                                                
                     Content of Employer’s Written Procedures for Medical Exposures 
                  1    The written procedures for medical exposures are to be produced to cover the following 
                  matters where appropriate: 
                          •  To correctly identify individuals to be exposed to ionising radiation; 
                          •  To identify individuals entitled to act as referrer, practitioner and operator; 
                          •  To be observed in the case of medico legal exposures; 
                          •  For making enquiries of women of child bearing age to establish whether the 
                             individual is pregnant; 
                          •  For the following of quality assurance programmes; 
                          •  For the assessment of patient dose; 
                          •  For the use of diagnostic reference levels for radiodiagnostic examinations, 
                             specifying that these are expected not to be exceeded for standard procedures 
                             when good and normal practice regarding diagnostic and technical performance is 
                             applied; 
                          •  For the use of dose constraints established by the employer for biomedical and 
                             medical research programmes where no direct medical benefit for the individual is 
                             expected from the exposure; 
                          •  For carrying out and recording of an evaluation for each medical exposure 
                             including factors relevant to the patient dose; 
                          •  To ensure that the probability and magnitude of accidental or unintended doses to 
                             patients from radiological practices is reduced so far as reasonably practicable. 
                   
                  2   The following procedures are also to be established: 
                          •  For ensuring that all practitioners and operators who are contracted to work in the 
                             radiology department are appropriately trained and undertake continuing education 
                             and training; 
                          •  For keeping records of training for practitioners and operators; 
                          •  For the reporting of incidents involving a medical exposure (excluding equipment 
                             defect) which has resulted in a patient dose much greater than intended; 
                          •  For ensuring that all exposures are justified prior to a medical exposure taking 
                             place; 
                          •  For ensuring that clinical audit is carried out in accordance with national 
                             procedures; 
                          •  For providing written protocols for every type of standard radiological practice for 
                             each equipment, e.g. an exposure factors chart; 
                                                                                            Leaflet 26 Annex B 
                                                            Page 1 
          JSP 392 Management of Radiation Protection in Defence 
           
          Part 2                   Octob2014                                                                                          er 
              •  For providing recommendations concerning referral criteria for medical exposures 
               including radiation doses, and shall ensure that these are available to the referrer.  
                                                Leaflet 26 Annex B 
                               Page 2 
