               
              WELCOME ON BOARD THE A2SEA VESSELS 
              Information leaflet regarding HSE procedures when coming onboard 
               
              GOING ON BOARD AN A2SEA VESSEL 
              Welcome on board, please respect our safety regulations at all times. 
              Please be aware that you will only be granted access to the site/vessels provided the following documents/certificates are 
              valid: 
                Professional certificates (e.g. welding, use of harness, etc.). No copies are accepted. 
                NOK form (if going offshore).  
                Valid Sea Survival certificate and a valid Health Certificate for Seafarers (if going offshore). 
                Passport 
              Copies of all your certificates must be forwarded to your contact person at A2SEA well ahead of your visit. 
              Prior to commencing your work on board / at site your certificates will be checked and you will not be allowed to commence 
              your work if the certificates are not in order. 
              In case of any emergency you must response according to the vessel emergency plan.  
              In case of any alarm STOP work immediately. Shut down electrical tools, turn off gas bottles and proceed to the 
              muster station (meeting point in case of emergency). 
               
              ARRIVAL  
              There are two ways of coming on board the vessel; 
              If done directly from the quay side by gangway, you must wear your PPE before you enter. As soon as you are on board, 
              you must be signed in. 
              Transfer to the vessel by crew boat may take place by FROG / Esvagt Basket or by boat landing. 
              Transfer via the FROG / Esvagt Basket requires an induction on quay prior to leaving. The FROG / Esvagt Basket induction 
              will be made during the site induction which is mandatory for everyone going offshore (if this will be used). 
               
              WHO IS RESPONSIBLE? 
              Subcontractor hired by A2SEA: 
                Supplying relevant certificates to A2SEA office/crew prior to visit. 
                Arrival on quay at agreed time. 
                Knowledge of HSE rules on board A2SEA vessels, cf. safety induction and this leaflet. 
                Knowledge of which PPE is required. 
                Wearing required PPE. 
                Bringing required certificates (originals) and passport. 
              At quay (A2SEA contact person): 
                Ensuring that PPE is worn correctly. 
                Ensuring that the person in question is listed on the POB (people on board) list/visitor log. 
              On board A2SEA vessel (duty officer / person in charge): 
                Ensuring that PPE is worn correctly. 
                Vessel induction / safety induction. 
                Certificate check. 
                Ensuring that toolbox talks are held according to SMS #7.5.9. 
                Issuing work permits. 
              Issued 30 June 2010, rev. 3                                                     1/3 
              
             SAFE CONDUCT ON BOARD 
             You will get an induction to the vessel from the duty officer who will explain about the vessel’s safety system, etc. If any 
             doubts, do not hesitate to ask!  
             No alcohol or drugs are allowed on board. You will be denied access on board if intoxicated by either alcohol or drugs. If the 
             master, or any other on board suspect influence of alcohol or drugs, the master can perform a drug and alcohol test 
             according to SMS procedure #2.1.5 
             We have a smoking policy applying to all our vessels. Smoking is only allowed in designated areas. Smoking may be totally 
             prohibited during performance of special types of tasks.  
             Before commencing any work on board the vessel, a toolbox meeting must be held and a work permit must be issued. For 
             further information please refer to the Work Permit System description. Participants required in the meeting depend on the 
             job.  
             The above rules must be observed at any time and failure to comply may result in immediate expulsion without prior 
             warning!  
             For more information if in doubt, please do not hesitate to ask the crew on board. 
              
             PERSONAL PROTECTION EQUIPMENT (PPE) 
             REQUIREMENTS 
             When working on board our vessels you must wear the following PPE: 
               Hard hat. 
               Safety shoes. 
               High visibility vest or jacket. 
               Safety glasses. 
               Furthermore, it is your responsibility to make sure that you have all the right PPE for your specific work. 
              
             WORK PERMIT SYSTEM 
             The vessel has a work permit system which has to be followed on every job on board. Do not hesitate to ask the crew or 
             officers on board about filling in and preparing work permits for your job. 
             How it works: 
               Before commencing a job contact the duty officer on the bridge. 
               The duty officer is responsible for holding a toolbox talk to ensure that any risk is evaluated and taken into account prior to 
                commencing any work. 
               Get an empty work permit. 
               Fill in the necessary information on the permit. 
               Get the permit authorised on the bridge. 
               If any alarm is raised during the job, stop the work immediately, shut down equipment and turn off gas bottles and 
                proceed to the muster station. The work permit is cancelled immediately and a new must be issued before the work can 
                be resumed. 
               Your job must always be finished within the time frame stated on the work permit. If finishing the job exceeds the time limit 
                on the work permit you will need a new work permit. 
               When the job is finished go to the bridge and get the work permit signed as finished. 
               Always remember to put safety as a top priority and report any incidents, accidents or near misses. 
              
              
              
              
              
             Issued 30 June 2010, rev. 3                                                    2/3 
              
             HEALTH AND SAFETY 
             No task or operation must be conducted if it jeopardizes the safety or health of any staff or crew member or if it could lead to 
             material damage. 
             Any dangers, hazards, near misses, accidents, incidents or dangerous occurrences must be reported to the duty officer or 
             person in charge immediately. 
             Work according to the safe working procedures and use the proper tools for the proper job. 
             Before starting a job it is vitally important to evaluate the risk associated with the location where the job is going to take 
             place. Always check with your contact person if there is a work place assessment/safe job analysis for the job to be done. 
             If you feel that the work cannot be done safely or if it cannot be done according to procedures, you must stop the work and 
             notify your supervisor or the duty officer. If it is the work of others you are obliged to tell them you believe that what they are 
             doing is unsafe and request they stop work until the situation is resolved. 
              
             GENERAL RULES WHILE ON BOARD 
             To ensure a nice and safe environment you will have to follow some simple and normal housekeeping rules: 
               No entry to any space, cabin, etc. unless required by the job and thus stated in the work permit. 
               Situation plan will indicate facilities for external workers. 
               Do not leave any objects lying around. 
               Clean up any spill. If major spill, report immediately to the crew. 
               Smoking is only allowed in designated areas. 
               Do not throw cigarette butts on deck. 
               Be sure to clean up after your job is done. 
               Do not throw any garbage overboard and keep the working area clean and tidy. 
               Keep gangways and emergency exits clear at all times. 
               Keep cabins and dayrooms tidy. 
              
             ENJOY YOUR STAY ON BOARD! 
             Issued 30 June 2010, rev. 3                                                    3/3 
