           Paying this invoice is                 
           as easy as can B
                                                                
                                                                
                                            What you need   
                                                         ence 
                                             to know about 
                                                    efer    .
                                               this r
                                                   number
                                         bpay.com.au
              Paying an invoice with a variable 
              customer reference number,  
              what does that mean?
              The BPAY customer reference number for this invoice or bill 
              changes each time a new invoice is issued. This does not 
              change how easy it is to pay with B
                                                                                                  PAY, it just means you need 
              to enter in the new customer reference number from your 
              paper invoice each time you pay.
              Paying by BPAY remains as ifve simple steps:
                    To Pay with BPAY
                      1   Register for internet, phone or mobile banking with 
                               your ifnancial institution, if you haven’t already
                      2   Look for the distinctive BPAY logo on your bills
                      3   L  og on to your internet banking site or call your phone 
                               banking services                                                      This bill has a variable 
                                                                                                     customer reference number 
                                                                                                     meaning it changes with each 
                                                                   <               >                 new bill. You need to ensure 
                                       Biller Code:  XXXX                                            you enter the customer 
                                                 <                                          >
                                       Ref:  XXXX XXXX XXXX                                          reference number from your 
                                                                                                     paper bill each time you make 
                                                                                                     a payment.
                     4   Select the BPAY or bill payment option and follow the 
                               simple instructions. Make sure that you always provide 
                               the new customer reference number from your paper 
                               invoice or bill (even if it is pre-populated within your 
                               internet bank site)
                      5   Wait for and record your receipt number
                                                        Biller Code: <1234
                                                        >Ref: 1234 1234 1234
              BPAY puts you in control
              On average over 6 million payments are made through BPAY 
              every week. With BPAY you can pay from the security of your 
              own bank, on the ‘net’ (via PC or mobile*) or over the phone. And 
              you have total control of you payments 24/7**. You can pay one 
              off bills or schedule payments for later#. It’s really that simple!
                               Easy as can B
              Disclaimer:
              *Assumes mobile coverage. **Subject to system availability and maintenance. #Scheduled payments are 
              subject to systems availability. PPAY Pty Limited ABN 69 079 137 518 (Phone (02) 9646 9222;ublished by B                                                                                                                  
              email: marketing@bpay.com.au). PAYB  Payments are offered by over 150 PAY BPayer Institutions. Each BPAY 
              Payer Institution is a Member of the BPAY Scheme - managed by BPAY Pty Ltd.
              When you use BPAY, the BPAY Scheme is paid fees rPAYelating to pr Scheme                                                                                           ocessing costs and B
              membership. Contact your ifnancial institution to see if it ofPAY and to get the terms and conditions orfers B                                                                                      
              Product Disclosure Statement (PDS). This is general advice -beforPAY please review the PDS and                                                                                       e using B
              consider whether BPAY is appropriate for your personal circumstances.
