                     Department of Employee Trust Funds
                State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual
        Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        1501 Viewing Your Invoice
        1502 Reconciling Your Invoice
        1503 Accepting and Paying Your Invoice (Wismart and Automated Clearing 
           House (ACH)
        1504 Late Interest Charge
        1505 Who to Contact for Assistance
        1501 Viewing Your Invoice
        Each month, ETF invoices employers for coverage one month in advance based on all active 
        health insurance contracts in the myETF Beneifts system. myETF Beneifts is the system of 
        record for health insurance eligibility, premium invoicing to employers, premium payment to 
        ETF by employers and premium payment to health plans and the program’s pharmacy beneifts 
        manager (Navitus) by ETF. Employers view their monthly invoice in the myETF Beneifts system. 
        Access to the myETF Beneifts System is through the On Line Network for Employers (ONE).
        A.  Invoice Generation 
           
          During the evening on the ifrst day of every month, the myETF Beneifts system initially 
          generates an invoice for health insurance premiums for all state employers. An e-mail is sent 
          to all employer’s authorized agent and insurance contacts to alert them that an invoice is 
          available for their review. An example of such an e-mail is below: 
         The e-mail address used is the one provided on the Online Network for Employers Security 
         Agreement (ET-8928) when requesting access to the myETF Beneifts system. The invoice 
         charges premiums for the next calendar month on all health insurance contracts that will be 
         active in that month. 
  ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                  State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                 Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        B.  Invoice Regeneration and E-mail Notices 
           
          Each day, health insurance enrollments, terminations, changes in coverage level, or 
          changes in health plans may be entered into myETF Beneifts by the employee, the 
          employer, or ETF. Whenever this is done, the invoice will regenerate to relfect what has 
          been entered into the system. myETF Beneifts will again send an e-mail to the authorized 
          agent and insurance contacts to inform them the employer’s invoice has again been created. 
          An example of this e-mail is in Section A above. The system will go through this process 
          each day that entries are made that change the previous days invoiced amount until the 
          invoice is accepted by the employer. If no new entries are made that impact the previous 
          day’s invoice amount, the system will not regenerate the invoice and no additional e-mails 
          will be sent.  
           
          Note: Changes to an employee’s or dependent’s personal information, physician or other 
          insurance information will not cause the invoice to regenerate.
        C.   Deadlines for Accepting Monthly Invoices 
           
          Once an invoice is generated by the myETF Beneifts system, an authorized employer 
          representative can accept that invoice at any time. This is done by accessing the myETF 
          Beneifts system and going to the Health drop-down and selecting Premium, Employer 
          Invoice. If the invoice has not been accepted, on the 15th of every month the myETF 
          Beneifts system will send an e-mail to the person authorized to accept the invoice to remind 
          them that the employer invoice has not been accepted. An example of such an e-mail is 
          below. 
          The latest date an employer must accept the invoice is the 24th of each month. If the 
          employer invoice is not accepted by 5:45 p.m. on the 24th of each month, any unaccepted 
          employer invoice will automatically be accepted by the myETF Beneifts system. See Section 
          1503 for more information on accepting and paying the monthly invoice and due dates.
        D.  Viewing the Employer Monthly Invoice  
           
          To access the monthly employer invoice, authorized users log into the myETF Beneifts 
                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
   State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
   Chapter 15 — Invoicing
          system. Once logged in, the ifrst screen displayed to the user will be the myEmployer Info 
          screen. 
         1.  The user should then click on the ‘Health’ tab. From the drop-down, move the mouse to 
           the ‘Premium’ button. Hover over the ‘Premium’ button to display the ‘Employer Invoice’ 
           and ‘Member Invoice’ buttons. Hover your mouse over ‘Employer Invoice’ and click on 
           that button. myETF Beneifts will take the user to the next screen—Employer E-mail 
           Check. 
         2.  On this screen, the agent or authorized user can use this screen to view and update their 
           individual e-mail contact information by clicking on the employer e-mail address update 
           link. If the user is not updating their e-mail contact information, click the ‘Continue’ button 
           to move to the Health Insurance Invoice Summary screen.
         3.  The Health Insurance Invoice Summary screen provides the user with the ability to 
           search for the invoice by coverage month and year. Users can review the current 
           coverage month’s invoice or previous invoices. This screen also provides employers 
           with the invoice amount, invoice number, invoice date (last date the invoice generated 
           or regenerated), accept date, accepted by, employee share ifeld, initial payment late 
           indicator, and interest amount. The employee share ifeld is a ifeld the employer is 
           required to make an entry in once it is determined how much of the invoice amount is the 
           employee share.  
            
           At the bottom of the Health Insurance Invoice Summary are the ‘Invoice Detail’, ‘Contract 
           Activity’ and ‘Accept’ buttons. The ‘Invoice Detail’ and ‘Contract Activity’ applications are 
           used in reconciling the invoice and are discussed in subchapter 1502. The ‘Accept’ button 
           is used once the invoice has been reconciled and the employer is ready to accept the 
           invoice and pay the invoice amount. Refer to subchapter 1503 for more information and 
           instructions on accepting and paying your invoice.
  ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                  State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                 Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        1502 Reconciling Your Invoice
        To ensure employers are accurately paying the premiums due for their employee’s health 
        insurance coverage, the invoice amount and invoice activity must be reconciled each month 
        against the employer’s payroll system. To reconcile the monthly invoice, employers have 
        available to them the “Invoice Detail” and “Contract Activity” applications. In addition, employers 
        have access to two reports to utilize in their reconciliation effort, the “Enrollment Report” and 
        “Premium Report”. 
        A.  Premium Report - Employer Premium Inquiry 
           
          Under Premium Report, the Employer Premium Inquiry application is the best application 
          available in myETF Beneifts for employer use in reconciling the monthly invoice. It provides 
          speciifc details on who an employer is paying for on an invoice for the coverage month being 
          invoiced and any adjustments in previous months for the current calendar year or previous 
          calendar year. Access to the Employer Premium Inquiry application is gained under the 
          ‘Health’ tab. 
         1.  Upon logging in to myETF Beneifts, hover over the Health tab. A drop-down will appear 
           with ‘Inquiry’, ‘Member Enrollment’, ‘Premium’, and ‘Termination of Coverage’ visible. 
           Hover over Inquiry which will make available the options of Enrollment Reports and 
           Premium Reports in a drop-down to the right. With your mouse, hover over Premium 
           Reports. The ‘Premium Inquiry’ tab will now be available. Hover over ‘Premium Inquiry’ 
           and click on that tab.  
                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
   State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
   Chapter 15 — Invoicing
         1.  When the ‘Premium Inquiry’ application opens, you will get the following screen. The user 
           must set the search iflters for coverage month and year, health plan and coverage type. 
           The following illustrates the results once the search iflters are set and the user clicks 
           ‘Display’. The results being displayed will provide the speciifc details of the employees 
           for whom you are being billed or refunds are being generated on that coverage month’s 
           invoice by health plan and coverage type with the speciifc premium amount. A separate 
           line will display for an adjustment that is refunding premiums to the employer for any 
           month(s) in the current year or previous year and a separate line will display any 
           adjustment that is charging premiums to the employer for any month(s) in the current 
           year or previous year.  
            
           The user can click on ‘Clear’ and set new iflters from the drop-downs, then click ‘Display’. 
           The user can also go directly to the drop-downs, select new iflters, then click ‘Display’ 
           again without clearing the screen.  
            
           The ‘Save As’ button provides the user the ability to take the information being displayed 
           and move it to an Excel spreadsheet. Using the Excel spreadsheet allows the user to sort 
           however they wish and run it against their payroll system in their reconciliation effort. 
  ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                  State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                 Chapter 15 — Invoicing
           In addition to the functionality of creating an Excel spreadsheet, employers have the 
           ability to sort the data retrieved by each speciifc column without creating an Excel 
           spreadsheet. This is accomplished by clicking on the arrow symbol (highlighted) just 
           under each column name. 
         2.  Invoice Detail 
            
           Access to the Invoice Detail application is gained through the Health Insurance Invoice 
           Summary screen. This is reached by clicking on Health, Premium, Employer Invoice as 
           previously shown. Click on the ‘Invoice Detail’ button to open the application. 
           The information displayed is the total number of contracts being billed on the invoice. 
           The information is broken down by health plan, employee type and coverage level. 
           The application totals the contracts into one group total and assesses the Employee 
           Reimbursement Accounts Administrative Fee that is added to the total invoice amount. 
           This application does not provide speciifc employee information for whom the employer is 
           being billed. 
                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
   State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
   Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        C.  Contract Activity  
           
          Access to the Contract Activity application is gained through the Health Insurance Invoice 
          Summary screen. Click on the ‘Contract Activity’ button to open the application. 
         This application has limited use in the reconciliation process. It does not identify for 
         the employer all the employees included in the invoice amount. It only identiifes which 
         speciifc employee is being added to coverage or terminated/deleted from coverage and 
         the retroactive premium adjustments being calculated. Activity is displayed by health plan 
         and lists employee type, coverage type, the activity (ADD, TERM, or DELETE), the date 
         the activity was created, employee’s Social Security number, employee’s name, coverage 
         effective date, coverage expiration date (if applicable), previous expiration date on a 
         reinstatement, premium and adjustment for premium. The adjustment indicates the amount 
         being charged or refunded. There is a current year adjustment and previous year adjustment 
         ifeld that will indicate the number of months for which premiums are being charged or 
         refunded. The ‘Save As’ button provides the employer with the functionality to move this data 
         to an Excel spreadsheet. From there, the data can be sorted however the employer wishes to 
         in their reconciliation effort.
  ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                  State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                 Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        D.  Enrollment Reports – Enrollment Inquiry, Dependent Inquiry and Address Inquiry 
           
          Under Enrollment Reports, the “Enrollment Inquiry” application, “Dependent Inquiry” 
          application and “Address Inquiry” application are available. The three enrollment reports are 
          described in this chapter.  
           
          The Enrollment Inquiry is very similar to the Premium Inquiry. This report will tell you 
          speciifcally which employee has active coverage under the employer’s group number on a 
          speciifc coverage month. However, this application will not provide any information regarding 
          previous months and previous year premium adjustments or current month premiums. The 
          Premium Inquiry application is the best application available in myETF Beneifts for employer 
          use in reconciling the monthly invoice. 
        1503 Accepting and Paying Your Invoice
        Wismart
        Automated Clearing House (ACH)
        Accepting the Invoice: 
        After viewing and reconciling the invoice, employers must accept the invoice. 
        1.  Key in the Employee Share amount and then click the ‘Accept’ button on the Invoice and 
          Payment Summary screen. 
        2.  On the next screen, review the invoice details and if everything is okay, click ‘Conifrm’. 
          Employers will then receive an e-mail acknowledging the acceptance of the invoice. Once 
          an invoice has been accepted, no further changes can be made to it. 
          If an invoice has not been accepted by the due date, the system will automatically accept it 
          on the employer’s behalf that night. The employer will receive an e-mail letting them know 
          that the system has accepted the invoice and they need to submit a payment.
          Accepting and conifrming the invoice does not mean a payment has been initiated.
        Paying the Invoice:
        ETF uses myETF Beneifts as the system of record. The invoice premium due ifeld is the amount 
        owed to ETF. The invoice relfects what ETF will remit to the health plans on behalf of the 
        employers. 
                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
   State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
   Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        State employers are set up to pay either by Wismart Payment Voucher (PV) or Automated 
        Clearing House (ACH). 
        Wismart PV:
        The employer will need to log in to Wismart and approve the applicable PV(s). Once the PV(s) 
        has been accepted in Wismart, ETF will see it on their report the following day. Payments 
        submitted in Wismart are manually keyed into the Health Insurance Payments System by 
        ETF staff at the end of each month. At this time the current invoice balance will be relfected in 
        myETF Beneifts. Any outstanding balances should be resolved on the next payment. 
        If you have any issues with Wismart you should contact the Wismart help desk at 1-608- 
        264-6600.
        Automated Clearing House (ACH):
        For state employers paying by ACH, after conifrming their invoice they will be automatically 
        taken to the US Bank E-Payment Log In screen. They can Log In, Register, or Pay Without 
        Registering.
        Log In – User should select this option if they have already registered for an account. This 
        is separate from ETF’s Online Network for Employers (ONE) or myETF Beneifts and uses a 
        different User ID & Password.
        Register – Simply follow the prompts to create an account. Registering allows users to save 
        their contact and banking information. Registered users can also view their account information 
        including prior and pending payments. 
        Pay Without Registering – This option allows a user to pay the invoice without having to log in 
        to an account. The contact and banking information has to be keyed, but does not get saved for 
        future use. 
              
  ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                                                                 State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                                                                                      Chapter 15 — Invoicing
                  Next will be the Make a Payment screen. 
                        
                  This will have 3 sections.
                  1.    My Payment – This will show the Amount Due and Due Date
                  2.    Payment Information – This is where users will select their payment terms
                        a.  Frequency – Select One Time.
                        b.  Payment Date – Select either Pay Now or Pay on a future date.
                             i.  Selecting Pay on a future date allows the user to select the date the funds will be 
                                 withdrawn. It can be any date in the future, but preferably on or before the due date. 
                                 c.  If the user is not using a registered account, the user will get a Contact 
                                      Information Section to ifll out.
                                                                                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
       State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
       Chapter 15 — Invoicing
                  3.    Payment Method – If a user is registered this will be the saved banking account.
                         a.  If a user is paying without registering, the user will need to ifll in the banking 
                             information.
                                              
                             Once all 3 sections are complete, click ‘Continue’.
                  The Review Payment screen will appear. Verify that it’s correct. If okay, user can click 
                  ‘Continue’.
     ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                  State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                 Chapter 15 — Invoicing
           
        If successful, a printable Conifrmation Page appears that will include a conifrmation number. 
        The user will also receive an e-mail with the conifrmation number and payment details.
              
        Upon successful completion, the payment will post to the employer’s invoice at 11:00 a.m. on 
        the payment date selected. 
                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
          State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
          Chapter 15 — Invoicing
                          There is no direct link to the U.S. Bank E-Payment Service so if an employer exits before 
                          scheduling a payment they will need to log back into myETF Beneifts. Instead of the ‘Accept’ 
                          button, the employer will see a ‘Pay’ button. Click ‘Pay’ and then ‘Conifrm’ on the next screen. 
                          The ‘Pay’ button is displayed until a payment has been posted to the invoice.
                          If a warning message displays stating that the invoice may have already been paid, employers 
                          should check their records. Here are four ways to check if payment has been previously made:
                                     1.  Check for print out of E-Payment Conifrmation Page.
                                     2.  Check e-mails – Employers would have received an e-mail with the payment details 
                                           and a conifrmation number.
                                     3.  Call ETF using the phone number listed on the invoice – Staff will be able to look up 
                                           any scheduled payments.
                                     4.  Continue on to the US Bank E-Payment Service and Log In if they are a registered 
                                           user.
                                                  a.  Click on the ‘My Account’  tab.
                                                  
                                                              i.    Go to Scheduled Payments – This will list any pending payments. It 
                                                                    will remain here as pending until the payment date.
                                                                        1.  If there is a pending payment, no further action is needed and the 
                                                                              user can logout.
                                                                        2.  If there is no pending payment, the user should select the ‘Make a 
                                                                              Payment’ tab and complete the process to submit a payment.
                            1504 Late Interest Charge
                            Payment is due the 24th of every month, with exceptions being weekends and US Bank 
                            holidays. If a payment is received after the due date then a late payment interest charge will 
                            be applied to the employer’s invoice based on the following calculation:
                                            Interest Charge = Invoice Premium Due x Number of days late x 0.04%
                            The interest charge will be assessed after the payment has been submitted and should be 
                            paid as soon as possible. For employers paying by Wismart PV, the late interest charge can 
                            be paid as an additional PV or an amount added to the following month’s PV. Employer’s 
                            paying by ACH will have to log in to myETF Beneifts and select the invoice month and year 
                            that received the interest charge. There should be an outstanding amount due. Just click 
                            on ‘Pay’ and it will take you through the normal ACH payment process via the US Bank 
                            E-Payment System. 
      ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
                                  State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
                                                 Chapter 15 — Invoicing
        Other Features - My Account:
        Users have the ability to view other features in the ‘My Account’  tab.
           1.  My Proifle – This is where a user’s Contact Info and Log In Details are stored. 
             Changes can be made here as needed.
               
           2.  Payment Methods – This will list any saved banking accounts. If users need to 
             update their banking information this is where they will need to go. They have the 
             option to edit or delete an existing account and to add a new account by selecting 
             Add a Payment Method.
              
           3.  Electronic Payment History – This is where users can go to view past payments. 
             Status will be marked as Processed. Data can be sorted by any of the columns and 
             there is also a search iflter. 
                                             ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
   State Agency Health Insurance Administration Manual 
   Chapter 15 — Invoicing
              
        1505 Who to Contact for Assistance
        For help accepting an invoice, paying an invoice, or logging into the US Bank E-Payment 
        System please contact:
               Laura Vang: 1-608 261-0064 or laura.vang@etf.wi.gov.
               Rolanda Franklin: 1-608-266-0781 or rolanda.franklin@etf.wi.gov.
  ET-1118 (Chapter 15 Revised 9/14)
