                                                               UCT Invoice requirements 
                       
                      It is of critical importance that we receive valid supporting documentation, meeting all legal and tax 
                      requirements. To ensure efficient handling and payment of your invoices and improved customer service, it 
                      is essential that you refer to the mandatory legal and UCT requirements to be added to each invoice or 
                      credit note.  
                      UCT may withhold payment if a vendor’s invoice is inaccurate, or does not meet UCT’s invoice 
                      requirements or legal or tax requirements. 
                      SARS and UCT Requirements  
                                 Supplier Information 
                                      Full name of the supplier 
                                      Full address of the supplier 
                                      Telephone and fax no of the supplier 
                                      The VAT identification number of the supplier: tax registration number 
                                 Customer Information 
                                      Full name – University of Cape Town  
                                      Name, department and physical address of recipient of goods/services 
                                      The VAT registration number of UCT, please quote:  
                                       University of Cape Town - VAT NO 4540125707 
                                 Checklist of requirements that MUST appear on your invoice: 
                                      The words "Tax Invoice" clearly indicated.  
                                      The invoice number (serialised) 
                                      Date of issue of the invoice 
                                      Description of goods and/or services 
                                      The quantity of the goods/services supplied or nature of the services rendered 
                                      The price per unit (excluding VAT) of the goods/services supplied. 
                                      Taxable amount per VAT rate or exemption 
                                      The total cost of the invoice. 
                                      The UCT purchase order number on all invoices - UCT will not be held liable for payment if a 
                                       purchase order number is not quoted on the invoice.  
                                      Any discounts or rebates, not included in the unit price 
                                      VAT rate(s) applied 
                                      Total VAT amount must be shown separately on invoices and similar documents 
                                      Total Invoice Amount 
                                      Goods dispatch note number 
                                      The UCT purchase order number must appear on all invoices.  
                                 General Information 
                                      Original tax invoices must be provided. Photocopies and faxes of invoices are not allowed. 
                                      No altered invoices 
                                      No multiple PO numbers referenced on invoice 
                                      Proper Remit address (that matches our system) 
                                      Emailed PDF formatted invoices are allowed 
                                      A ‘systems generated’ Copy Tax Invoice (printout or e-mail) with the words "Copy tax invoice" 
                                       to be submitted if the original tax invoice has gone astray.  
                                      No payments are made against quotations or from statements, delivery tickets, etc.  
                                      Where advance payment is essential a Pro Forma invoice is required.  
                                      A monthly statement of account is required for reconciliation purposes. 
                      Vendor Highlights - What You Need To Know 
                                 1.    Doing business with UCT 
                                 2.    Payment terms  
                                 3.    Ordering and payment 
                                 4.    Where to send your invoices 
                                 5.    Who to contact in Creditors 
                                 6.    Changes to vendor information 
                            1.   Doing business with UCT  
                                 The University of Cape Town relies on a significant number of suppliers to provide our faculties, 
                                 departments and research units with the goods and services they  require in support of our mission 
                                 to be an outstanding teaching and research University. It is therefore important for potential 
                                 suppliers to understand how to partner with the University to enable us to meet our business goals 
                                 and fulfil our responsibilities. 
                                 The University’s Procurement and Payment Services (PPS) section is responsible for managing the 
                                 University’s procurement function. PPS is committed to providing the University community with an 
                                 efficient, user friendly procure to pay service. This requires optimum administrative efficiency to 
                                 provide the highest level of client support. 
                            2.  Payment terms  
                                 UCT’ standard payments terms are 30 days from date of invoice. Note that COD payment is not 
                                 possible. Please remember that every invoice must follow an established payment process, which 
                                 is contemplated according to your payment terms with UCT. 
                            3.  Ordering and payment  
                                 UCT pays its registered vendors by EFT or by procurement card. In either case, no goods or services 
                                 should be supplied without receiving a UCT purchase order. This purchase order number must be 
                                 included on the invoice as UCT will not be held liable for payment if a purchase order number is 
                                 not quoted on the invoice.  
                                 To ensure faster processing of your invoices, please ensure your billing invoice matches our 
                                 purchase order (line by line); contains the proper unit of measure; and agrees with the PO 
                                 price.  We will not issue payment until the goods or services have been received in our system, and 
                                 our procurement specialist/buyer has approved any discrepancies from the original purchase 
                                 order.  ALWAYS ensure the remit-to address and name on your invoice is correct and that we have 
                                 received the same information to update our records.  If different in our system, this will further 
                                 delay processing of your invoice. 
                            4.  Postal address for invoices 
                                 University of Cape Town, Creditors, Private Bag X3, Rondebosch, 7700  
                            5.  Who to contact in Creditors for the following: 
                                      Processing of all trade vendor invoices 
                                      Processing of One Time Vendor invoices 
                                      Invoices rejected(queries separated into alpha sections) 
                                      Monthly reconciliation of Supplier Statement of account 
                                      Payment notification and payment inquiries 
                                        
                      Trade Creditors clerks and responsibilities 
                      Direct matching on all sections -Trade vendors                        Nomsa Kenana 
                                                                                            Tel.:  021 650 3723 
                                                                                             Email:  nomsa.kenana @uct.ac.za 
                      Section A-C                                                           Achmat Salie 
                      Queries & reconciliations                                             Tel.:  021 650 4360 
                                                                                            Email:  achmat.salie@uct.ac.za 
                      Section D-E                                                           Mary Ransom 
                      Club Corp,Budget, Amex                                                Tel.:  021 650 2234 
                      Queries & reconciliations                                             Email:  mary.ransom@uct.ac.za 
                      Section F-J                                                           Wendy Ntoyanto 
                      Queries & reconciliations                                             Tel.:  021 650 4753 
                                                                                            Email:  wendy.ntoyanto@uct.ac.za 
                      Section K-M                                                           Melanie Karsten 
                      Queries & reconciliations                                             Tel.:  021 650 2236 
                                                                                            Email:  melanie.karsten@uct.ac.za 
                      Section N-R                                                           Sylvia Paulson 
                      Queries & reconciliations                                             Tel.:  021 650 2024 
                                                                                            Email:  sylvia.paulson@uct.ac.za 
                      Section S-Z                                                           Lindy Gomba 
                      Queries & reconciliations                                             Tel.:  021 650 2237 
                                                                                            Email:  lindy.gomba@uct.ac.za 
                      Travel and Car Hire                                                   Sharkey Abader 
                                                                                            Tel.:  021 650 2238 
                                                                                            Email:  sharkey.abader@uct.ac.za 
                      Adhoc Creditors clerks and responsibilities 
                      Payments                                                                 Ielhaam Adams 
                            o    Electronic Payments ‘Host to Host’                            Tel.:  021 650 2233 
                            o    Cheque Payments                                               Email:  ielhaam.adams@uct.ac.za 
                            o    Third Party Payments                                           
                      Cheque maintenance: 
                            o    Uncashed cheques 
                            o    Stale cheques 
                            o    Cheques to be cancelled 
                            o    Cheques to be re-issued 
                            o    Reimbursements                                                Meagan Adams 
                            o    Subsistence and Travel                                        Tel.:  021 650 2235 
                            o    Mileage claims                                                Email:  meagan.adams@uct.ac.za 
                            o    Advances 
                      One Time Vendors                                                         Charmaine Buys 
                            o    Vatable vendors                                                
                            o    Non-Vatable vendors                                           Tel.:  021 650 3116 
                            o    Subscriptions                                                 Email:  charmaine.buys@uct.ac.za 
                            o    Registrations                                                  
                            o    Conferences                                                   Moira Carelse 
                      Cheque Distribution                                                      Tel.:  021 650 3216 
                                                                                               Email:  moira.carelse@uct.ac.za 
                       
                                  
