              
             Apple’s Paper and  
             Packaging Strategy 
             October 2017
                                            Overview 
                                            Forests are a wonderful resource for cleaning air, purifying water, sequestering carbon, 
                                            and sheltering wildlife. As part of Apple’s commitment to resource conservation, we 
                                            designed and run a program to address the impact of our use of paper for packaging. 
                                            The initiative started with a detailed assessment of Apple’s fiber use, which led to a 
                                            three-part strategy: (1) use paper more efficiently and, where possible, use recycled 
                                            paper; (2) source virgin fiber responsibly; and (3) protect and create sustainable 
                                            working forests. The third initiative—though not an obvious course of action at the 
                                            project’s outset—helped ensure that our efforts to source virgin fiber responsibly do not 
                                            simply take away from the world’s supply of paper derived from sustainably managed 
                                            forests, but also grow the supply. We hope this case study offers a model from which 
                                            others can learn and inspires action to protect working forests and other resources on 
                                            which we all rely. 
                                            Introduction 
                                            To protect the environment for the future, Apple asks bold questions, tackles big problems, and relentlessly 
                                            innovates to solve them. We strive to make not just the best products in the world, but the best products for 
                                            the world. Three priorities guide our efforts: 
                                            1. Reduce Apple’s impact on climate change by using renewable energy sources and driving energy 
                                                 efficiency in products and facilities. 
                                            2. Conserve precious resources by using materials efficiently, using more recycled and renewable content 
                                                 in products, and recovering material from products at the end of their life. 
                                            3. Identify, develop, and utilize safer materials in our products and processes. 
                                            To conserve resources, Apple aims to shift our use of resources from a linear model of extraction, use, and 
                                            disposal, toward a closed loop. Closed loop efforts apply to both finite and renewable resources. For finite 
                                            materials, closing the material loop means sourcing recycled materials and enabling those materials to be 
                                            returned to the recycled market at product end of life. For renewable materials, our focus is on both 
                                            responsible sourcing and regeneration: sourcing either recycled or responsibly produced materials and, 
                                            where necessary, creating the equivalent supply of the resource. 
                                            Forests harvested for paper pulp represent one of the renewable resources on which Apple relies, and 
                                            global degradation of forest resources makes them a key target of closed-loop efforts. Overexploitation  
                                            and deforestation for alternative land uses and illegal logging are contributing to a net decline of global 
                                                                      1
                                            forest resources.  The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates that from 
                                            1990 to 2015 there was a global net loss of more than 300 million acres of forest—an area about the size  
                                                                    2
                                            of South Africa.  In the United States alone, working forests, or those harvested for forest products and 
                                            services, declined by 23 million acres over the last 15 years and an estimated 45 million more acres are 
                                                                                             3
                                            currently at risk of development.  A limited number of working forests around the world are under 
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                              2
                                            responsible management, defined by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) as “operating with a balance of 
                                            social, environmental and economic outcomes in the current global context.”4 Only an estimated  
                                            38 percent of total production forest area is certified for responsible management under the FSC and the 
                                                                                                                                            5
                                            Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC).  
                                            The global decline and degradation of working forests is concerning given the increasing global demand for 
                                            forest products and the additional value that forests provide, including habitat for wildlife, improved air and 
                                                                                                                               6
                                            water quality, climate regulation, and job opportunities.  
                                            To play a role in reversing negative resource trends, we are committed to efficiently using and responsibly 
                                            sourcing materials for our paper packaging, increasing the use of recycled materials, and growing the 
                                            global supply of sustainably produced paper products by the same amount that Apple consumes. These 
                                            efforts contribute to closing the loop on Apple’s supply chains and improving our environmental footprint. 
                                            Apple’s Approach 
                                            Our three-part strategy to mitigate Apple’s impact on current and future forest resources through the use 
                                            of packaging is to: 
                                            • Use paper more efficiently and use recycled paper where possible. 
                                            •                                                   7
                                               Source virgin paper responsibly.  
                                            •                                                                         8
                                               Protect and create sustainable working forests.  
                                            The first two components of the strategy seek to reduce Apple’s demand for the resource and improve 
                                            Apple’s sourcing practices. However, at Apple we were not confident that responsible sourcing alone would 
                                            send a market signal that was strong enough to increase supply proportionally. The third initiative—to 
                                            protect and create sustainable working forests—helps to ensure that Apple is not simply taking responsibly 
                                            produced material from another buyer, but is instead growing the total global supply for a positive 
                                            environmental impact. 
                                            Paper Footprint 
                                            Understanding Apple’s fiber use was an essential step toward reducing our impact. In 2015, we calculated 
                                            a fiber footprint for our product packaging. Starting at the product level, the footprint includes all fiber 
                                            materials that go into finished goods packaging and protective shipper boxes. The footprint also accounts 
                                            for yield losses, meaning that fiber waste through die-cutting and other parts of the manufacturing process 
                                            are included. We then multiplied each product-level result by the number of units sold per product and 
                                            aggregated across products to measure the yearly product footprint. We then added fiber use by Apple 
                                            facilities, including fiber used in printing, food, and janitorial services, as well as retail data, to the product 
                                            data to calculate a total corporate fiber footprint. 
                                            The footprint, which can be analyzed based on various factors including product or fiber type, identifies 
                                            impact hotspots to drive decisions regarding the implementation and tracking of packaging initiatives.  
                                            For example, we used the footprint to identify the most significant uses of virgin materials throughout 
                                            packaging products to help guide the search for recycled alternatives.  
                                            We also used the fiber footprint to inform Apple’s forestry strategy: to measure progress toward our goal  
                                            to protect and create sustainably managed working forests, we compare the mass of sustainable pulp 
                                            generated annually from protected forests with the mass of virgin fiber pulp used annually in our packaging 
                                            (including material loss during the manufacturing process). 
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                              3
                                            The level of detail captured in the fiber footprint facilitates this comparison by quantifying not just the amount 
                                            of virgin paper used by Apple, but more specifically, the amount of virgin pulp in the paper. Because virgin 
                                            pulp can represent less than half of paper content—fillers, binders, and pigments making up the remaining 
                                            amount—the fiber footprint’s focus on pulp rather than paper provides a more accurate measure of Apple’s 
                                            use of pulp from trees and a more accurate goal for the sustainable production of the forestry program. 
                                            Efficient Packaging  
                                            Armed with data from the fiber footprint, we looked critically at the materials used in Apple’s packaging. 
                                            This required asking fundamental questions: Why are we using these materials in these quantities? Is use 
                                            of these materials essential or is there an opportunity for alternative materials and designs? The strategy 
                                            that emerged from these questions extended beyond just paper to include moving from petroleum-based 
                                            plastics to fiber-based materials; reducing use of materials; and replacing virgin with recycled materials. 
                                            Implementation required challenging the material and design constraints that previously prevented use of 
                                            alternative materials and allocating the time and resources to overcome these barriers. Even more essential 
                                            to finding solutions were the buy-in from teams across the organization and a shared commitment to 
                                            reducing Apple’s environmental impact. 
                                            Throughout the process, we chose to make changes that would have the greatest potential for impact 
                                            based on the amount of material used, the time required to develop an alternative, available expertise, and 
                                            influence with suppliers. The effort is ongoing as teams continue to address those materials used in lesser 
                                            quantities to improve the overall sustainability of Apple’s packaging.  
                                            Changes in iPhone packaging from iPhone 6s to iPhone 7 illustrate the significant impact potential of these 
                                            efforts. With sales of iPhone exceeding 200 million units in fiscal year 2015, iPhone represented a key 
                                            target for high-impact packaging changes. Apple teams looked for opportunities to change both the 
                                            quantity and type of materials used in iPhone packaging. For iPhone 6s packaging, we used two stacked 
                                            plastic trays—one to hold iPhone and the other to secure the accessories. For iPhone 7, a new design 
                                            allowed a single tray to do the work of two, eliminating the need for a second tray and significantly reducing 
                                            material use. Apple teams also found a fiber-based material that could be used to make the trays, replacing 
                                            the petroleum-based plastic previously used. 
                                            A similar exploration of new materials and design led to innovations in the EarPods carrier. For  
                                            iPhone 6s, a plastic carrier had been designed to discreetly wrap cables and hold the EarPods in place.  
                                            For iPhone 7, Apple developed a paperboard-based solution to leverage a functional set of folds and cuts 
                                            that elegantly secured the EarPods and cable. Changes to the tray and EarPods carrier contributed  
                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                            to an 84 percent decrease in plastic usage for iPhone 7 packaging compared with iPhone 6s.  
                                             iPhone 7 packaging
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                              4
                                            Last, an exploration of virgin fiber hotspots led our teams to address the outer iPhone packaging box  
                                            wrap itself, which used significant amounts of virgin fiber–based solid bleached sulfate (SBS). With  
                                            the launch of iPhone 7, a recycled content paperboard replaced a layer of SBS, contributing to an 
                                            approximately 30 percent increase in recycled fiber content between iPhone 6s and iPhone 7. 
                                                                                                                  Fiber & Plastic Mass (g)
                                            iPhone 6s
                                               iPhone7
                                                             0                                40                                80                               120                               160
                                                                 Virgin Fiber                           Recycled Fiber                              Plastic
                                            Changes to packaging from iPhone 6s to iPhone 7 reduced the amount of plastic used and increased the use of recycled fiber. 
                                            Continued pursuit of improvements for iPhone 8 packaging shows Apple’s attention to detail and ongoing 
                                            commitment to making smaller and often more difficult changes. For iPhone 8, this meant pursuing an 
                                            alternative to a polypropylene wrap that protected the power adapter. Finding a fiber alternative proved 
                                            challenging since fiber naturally expands and contracts with changes in humidity. The significant number of 
                                            suppliers and locations through which the power adapter wrap would pass made controlling the humidity of 
                                            the environment impossible. This required Apple to take a very hands-on approach, working directly with 
                                            the supplier to alter aspects of the manufacturing process to create a fiber wrap that would meet technical 
                                            needs. While the power adapter wrap is a small piece of the iPhone packaging, it represents a significant 
                                            amount of material given the number of iPhone units sold. This detail is one of many that make packaging 
                                            more uniform, reduce environmental impact, and create a better experience for the customer. 
                                            Responsible Sourcing 
                                            Because virgin fiber remains necessary to meet Apple’s structural and design requirements, responsible 
                                            sourcing of this fiber is an essential piece of our environmental strategy for paper and packaging. To 
                                            support our responsible sourcing goal, we recently enhanced Apple’s fiber specification for even more 
                                            responsible and transparent sourcing practices for all fibers used in product packaging or print 
                                            applications, whether from wood, non-wood, or recycled sources. 
                                            Specification Requirements 
                                            An important question in writing and updating our specification was which forest certification schemes to 
                                            include in Apple’s standard. To maintain flexibility for our suppliers, we opted to leave the choice of which 
                                            forest certification scheme to use with the supplier, as long as their management practices met the 
                                            requirements to achieve certification and comply with Apple’s requirements. The updated specification 
                                            requires that “all wood and non-wood fibers used in packaging or print applications be derived entirely 
                                            from sources certified to or endorsed by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), the Programme for the 
                                            Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC), FSC Controlled Wood, or another specification that has been 
                                                                           10 
                                            approved by Apple.”
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                              5
                                 In addition to full FSC and PEFC certifications, Apple teams also chose to include FSC Controlled Wood and 
                                 any certifications “reviewed and approved by Apple.” Together, these options provide suppliers some 
                                 flexibility in meeting our requirements. As of October 2017, however, no Apple suppliers have needed an 
                                 alternative to the FSC or PEFC certifications, or to FSC Controlled Wood. 
                                 The specification defines separate requirements for Apple-selected and supplier-selected materials. For 
                                 the former, we have the ability to engage with the supply chain directly and review documentation that 
                                 shows the movement of products from forests to final packaging. For the latter, however, our visibility into 
                                 the materials’ upstream sources is more limited. Thus, we decided to require an additional FSC or PEFC 
                                 chain of custody certification for supplier-selected materials to ensure that forest products could be traced 
                                 back to the forest of origin. The chain of custody represents all steps a material goes through from the time 
                                                                                                                                                   11 
                                 it leaves the forest or is recycled to the time the material is sold with a claim of responsible production.
                                 Because materials may change ownership many times throughout processing and distribution, tracing 
                                 materials to their source requires diligence. Both FSC and PEFC offer verifications that a product has been 
                                 successfully traced back through the steps in the chain of custody, providing a valuable assurance.12 
                                 Finally, the updated specification includes requirements for other fiber sources as well. For non-wood  
                                 fibers from waste products, such as bagasse from sugarcane, the specification requires evidence of 
                                 responsible sourcing to ensure that these materials come from renewable sources grown without 
                                 significant environmental consequences like deforestation or loss of critical ecosystems. The specification 
                                 also considers the end-of-life impact of materials by requiring that non-wood fibers from waste products 
                                 be recyclable with the mixed-paper stream. For fibers from recycled sources, the specification requires  
                                                                                                            13
                                 that recycled content meet the minimum standards of IEEE 1680.1.  
                                 Implementation of the Specification 
                                 The updated Sustainable Fiber Specification is made more effective by Apple’s willingness to invest in 
                                 compliance. To ensure that suppliers are meeting the specification, we not only require a signed declaration 
                                 of conformity and proof of certification, but also conduct audits to further confirm compliance. 
                                 Each year, Apple carries out a three-step audit process. First, suppliers perform a self-audit, mapping 
                                 supply chains and submitting relevant sourcing information and documentation to Apple. Second, Apple 
                                 audits each supplier to confirm that submitted documentation can be substantiated. These audits go so far 
                                 as to include a fiber test that reveals any pulp from endangered species or from species with a high risk of 
                                 unsustainable management practices. Finally, in the case of noncompliance or insufficient documentation, 
                                 a corrective action plan with a timeline is created for the supplier. 
                                 After releasing our specification in 2015, we worked hard to make sure that suppliers knew about our 
                                 requirements and how to comply. As forest certification is increasingly viewed as a market entry 
                                 requirement, many suppliers’ processes already met the specification’s standard at the time of its 
                                 implementation. Suppliers did experience a learning curve, however, as they sought to understand what 
                                 evidence and documentation they needed to share with Apple. The top two findings from the audits 
                                 performed in 2016 resulted not from the lack of compliance, but from the lack of sufficient documentation. 
                                 To help educate suppliers about the evidence required for the specification, Apple created supporting 
                                 guidance available in English and Chinese. In addition, we use audits as opportunities to further teach 
                                 suppliers about the process. 
                                 Mapping our supply chain proved highly valuable to Apple. The greater visibility revealed that complex paper 
                                 supply chains were, in many cases, diamond shaped, with many suppliers sourcing from the same paper mills. 
                                 This leaves the door open for even more efficient future sustainability interventions targeted at the mill level.      
                                 Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                    6
                                Compliance with the Specification 
                                Despite the relatively recent implementation of the specification, nearly all of the materials Apple sources    
                                are in compliance: more than 99 percent of the paper used in Apple’s packaging and corporate offices in 
                                2016 came from either responsibly managed forests, controlled wood, or recycled sources. And we continue 
                                working to eliminate the small amount of paper use, from acquisitions and sale of previous-generation 
                                products, that represents the less than 1 percent of our packaging materials that are noncompliant. 
                                Reducing use of paper materials, increasing use of recycled materials, and responsibly sourcing the 
                                remaining virgin material certainly improved Apple’s direct resource use. However, the ultimate goal guiding 
                                our teams was not limited to improving Apple’s environmental impact in isolation—we wanted to create a 
                                positive global impact on forest resources. Although we were mitigating Apple’s footprint, we questioned 
                                whether forest resources were truly better off or if, by reducing the world’s supply of responsibly and 
                                sustainably managed paper, we had simply shifted the impacts to other buyers. This debate led to an 
                                additional forest initiative beyond the scope we had originally imagined. 
                                Creating and Protecting Sustainable Working Forests 
                                Concerned that our responsible sourcing efforts might simply strain a limited global supply of product, 
                                Apple sought to protect and expand the number of responsibly or sustainably managed working forests  
                                to cover all its product packaging needs. This effort helped ensure that Apple did not displace another 
                                willing buyer of responsibly produced fiber, but instead increased the total amount produced. 
                                Though originating from a focus on forest products, the effort considered the broader value of forests, 
                                including important contributions to habitat for wildlife, carbon sequestration, and air and water quality.  
                                We tapped into the expertise of partners to take these factors into account in designing strategies with  
                                the greatest opportunity for impact.  
                                Because Apple aimed to achieve a positive impact on the global commodity market, the initiative targeted 
                                forests harvested for paper pulp and recommended by expert partners, whether or not these forests were 
                                part of Apple’s current supply chains. Linking these long-term efforts to our own supply chains, which often 
                                change, would not have created significantly different environmental impact—and it was unnecessary to 
                                meet our design and engineering requirements. 
                                The initiative launched in the United States in April 2015 and soon expanded to China, covering two 
                                countries whose regulatory and political structures required significantly different approaches to forest 
                                management and protection.  
                                United States  
                                In the United States, the key challenge was finding a model that would improve the management of working 
                                forests, generate further supply of responsible pulp, and ensure the protection of forest resources into the 
                                future. Apple selected The Conservation Fund (the Fund) as a partner for their experience and for their 
                                Working Forest Fund® model, which offered an innovative approach to decrease forest-based supply chain 
                                risks and halt the loss of the last big, intact, privately held forests in the United States.  
                                Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                               7
                                            Through its Working Forest Fund, the Fund aims to ensure the vital role of forests in providing clean air and 
                                            water, wildlife habitat, and economic benefits for communities across the United States. With support from 
                                            Apple, the Fund identifies and purchases working forests with ecological and economic assets that were 
                                            threatened by large-scale fragmentation or development. The Fund then places a conservation easement 
                                            on the land to ensure that it is sustainably managed and protected from development in perpetuity. Once 
                                            appropriate partners are found, the Fund transfers the easement to a qualified holder responsible for its 
                                            enforcement, and sells the forest in the open market. After the sale of the property, they reinvest funds from 
                                            the sale to protect additional working forests, boosting local economies by maintaining jobs and creating a 
                                                                                                                     14
                                            supply of responsibly managed forest products.  
                                            Apple and The Conservation Fund are protecting Reed Forest in Maine. (EcoPhotography/Jerry Monkman)  
                                            Since 2015, Apple and The Conservation Fund have protected more than 36,000 acres of working forest in 
                                            the eastern United States, including Brunswick Forest in North Carolina and Reed Forest in Maine—both at 
                                            risk of development or fragmentation before the collaboration. So far, the project has generated enough 
                                            sustainably produced pulp to make a stack of iPhone 6s boxes more than 1,500 times as tall as Mt. Everest.  
                                            This initiative not only provides a steady supply of sustainably harvested wood to paper and pulp mills,  
                                            but it also prevents forest habitat fragmentation, addresses climate change, and enhances local water  
                                            and air quality. Protection of the Reed Forest, for example, supports a robust forest industry employing  
                                            more than 38,000 people in the state and adds to conserved lands and interconnected forests that extend 
                                                                15
                                            into Canada.  Third-party forest certification provides measures for the protection of wildlife, which is 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                            particularly important given the presence of six rare species, including the Canada Lynx, in the area.  
                                            China 
                                            Expansion of the initiative to China represents an important step in Apple’s long-term commitment to  
                                            the country. We also chose China because of the significant national demand for pulp and paper and the 
                                            low supply of wood in the country for making pulp and paper products. Though the National Forest 
                                                                              17
                                            Conservation Program  has been working to protect state-owned forests, net forest loss in China between 
                                                                                                                               18
                                            2001 and 2015 is estimated to exceed 18 million acres.  
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                              8
                                            Expanding to a country with different environmental regulations, approaches to land ownership, and 
                                            strategies for conservation presented significant opportunities and challenges for Apple. In particular, 
                                            China’s approach to property law meant that the easements used in the United States weren’t feasible, 
                                            requiring that Apple find a different model for long-term forest protection. 
                                            Apple elected to partner with World Wildlife Fund (WWF) because of the NGO’s technical expertise, 
                                            experience in partnering with the Chinese government and other regional partners, and previous work  
                                            in generating the supply of and demand for responsibly produced forest products. Through a proposed 
                                            initiative designed to increase demand for responsibly produced forest products, as well as to improve 
                                            forest management practices and national forest management policies, WWF offered the long-term focus 
                                            adapted to the Chinese market that Apple sought. 
                                            The WWF China “Green Me” campaign video asks, “The forest is part of our life. How can we give back to it?”  
                                            The Apple and WWF China initiative, now in its third year, aims to catalyze responsible forestry and trade  
                                            in China, particularly in semi-natural working forests and plantations that supply China’s pulp and paper 
                                            sector. Through pilot projects and strategic engagement, the project endeavors to demonstrate best forest 
                                            management practices and, ultimately, aims to assist in China’s efforts in improving its forest policies  
                                            and regulations. 
                                            Integrated into WWF China’s broader forestry strategy, Apple’s collaboration with WWF has three  
                                            primary objectives:  
                                            1. Increase responsible management of working forests in China by creating up to 300,000 acres of  
                                                 FSC–certified forests and up to 700,000 acres of forests under improved management. This objective 
                                                 seeks additional impact by improving management of those forests unable to obtain FSC certification 
                                                 because of previous management practices or other disqualifying factors. 
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                              9
                                            2. Improve China’s policy framework to encourage responsible forest management. This objective 
                                                 capitalizes on the lessons learned in forest management to inform government policy and share best 
                                                 practices. One example of this work is the creation of a best management practice guide based on an 
                                                 assessment of current challenges, case studies of exemplary management, and global best practices. 
                                                 Supporting effective policies enables the initiative to create a ripple effect and to help forest 
                                                 management improvements endure. 
                                            3. Establish long-term market incentives in China for responsibly sourced paper. Increasing the supply of 
                                                 responsibly sourced products has a limited effect if demand for these products does not increase 
                                                 proportionally. Growing consumer awareness can help unlock lasting demand for these products. To 
                                                 achieve this objective, WWF China has launched a “Green Me” awareness-raising campaign focused on 
                                                                                                           19
                                                 FSC certification, among other efforts.  
                                            Approximately 320,000 acres of forest have received FSC certification as part of the initiative, exceeding 
                                            the initial goal. WWF China has also secured commitments from eight forestry companies, representing 
                                            more than 450,000 acres, to improve their forest management practices. The permanence of these 
                                            improvements depends on government and forest manager actions over the long term, further highlighting 
                                            the importance of the relationship-building and broader awareness-raising components of the initiative. 
                                            Through the U.S. and China initiatives, Apple has met its goal to protect and create enough responsibly 
                                            managed forests to cover all of its product packaging needs. As paper demands grow and change, we are 
                                            prepared to continue protecting and improving the management of the world’s forests. 
                                            Conclusion 
                                            Our paper and packaging initiative represents the efforts of a single corporate consumer of fiber in the 
                                            global market for forestry products. Yet it has the potential for much greater impact, triggering positive 
                                            ripple effects both inside and outside of Apple.  
                                            Since the introduction of our program in 2015, its successes have inspired us to rethink our approach to 
                                            other key materials and begin pursuing closed-loop supply chains for the finite resources we use to make 
                                            our products. 
                                            We also hope that our program highlights a process for others to take responsibility for their impact on 
                                            global resources and work with external stakeholders to protect the environment. The evolution of the 
                                            initiative over time reveals questions that may be valuable for others to ask themselves: What makes up  
                                            our fiber footprint? What are the hotspots that can be addressed first? Given our reliance on partners in  
                                            the supply chain, to what degree are we willing to leverage our influence and invest to ensure improved 
                                            practices? Perhaps most interesting is the question that led Apple to consider whether efficient use and 
                                            responsible sourcing were sufficient: Are we truly leaving global resources better off than we found them? 
                                            Underpinning this debate and the solutions that emerged is a larger sense of purpose shared by the Apple 
                                            teams involved. With an internal, short-term focus alone, the project could have succeeded with efficiency 
                                            and responsible sourcing efforts that would have reduced Apple’s direct environmental footprint. Instead,  
                                            a broader commitment resulted in changes that were not obvious from the project’s outset but were 
                                            essential to meaningful global impact. Allowing this broader environmental commitment to drive initiatives 
                                            may be key to creating fundamental and necessary shifts in the use of global resources. 
                                            Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                             10
                                                               Acknowledgments 
                                                               Apple’s work on packaging, paper sourcing, and forestry requires effort from across the company. 
                                                               Contributors to this paper include Chris Busch, Amanda Gibson, Connie Yang, VY Chow, Steve Kuo,  
                                                               Julie Rapoport, Alice Kodama, and Jason Guo. 
                                                               For inquiries about this paper, contact Chris Busch or email environment-report@apple.com. 
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                               1   Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015: How Are the World’s Forests Changing? Second 
                                                                   Edition. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2016. 
                                                               2  Ibid. 
                                                               3  Jackson, Lisa P. “Why Apple Is Permanently Protecting Working Forests.” Medium, 2015. https://medium.com/@lisapjackson/why-apple-is-permanently-
                                                                   protecting-working-forests-6f49a7d4bef5. 
                                                               4  Forest Stewardship Council. Global Strategic Plan 2015 - 2020 Delivering Forests For All Forever: A Bolder, Stronger, More Effective FSC. 2015.  
                                                                   https://ic.fsc.org/en/fsc-global-strategic-plan-2015-2020. 
                                                               5  There are 4 billion hectares of forests globally, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization’s Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015: How Are the 
                                                                   World’s Forests Changing? Second Edition, 1.24 billion hectares of which are production forests according to the Food and Agriculture Organization’s Forest 
                                                                   Products: Annual Market Review 2015–2016. Of the production forests, 196 million hectares are FSC certified and 271 million hectares are PEFC certified 
                                                                   according to 2017 data from the two organizations, yielding a total of 467 million hectares of production forests certified, or 38 percent of the total. 
                                                               6  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015: How Are the World’s Forests Changing? Second 
                                                                   Edition. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2016. 
                                                               7  Virgin materials indicate those that do not come from a recycled source, not materials that come from a virgin forest. 
                                                               8   In this context “creating” a sustainable supply means converting to sustainable management an existing working forest. 
                                                               9  For more information on iPhone 7 packaging, see Apple’s Product Environmental Report: iPhone 7. 2016.  
                                                               10 For more details, see Apple’s Sustainable Fiber Specification, Version C. 2016. https://www.apple.com/environment/pdf/
                                                                   Apple_Sustainable_Fiber_Specification_April2016.pdf. 
                                                               11  Forest Stewardship Council. “Chain of Custody Certification.” 2017. https://ic.fsc.org/en/what-is-fsc-certification/chain-of-custody-certification. 
                                                               12 Ibid. 
                                                               13 IEEE. “IEEE 1680.1: IEEE STD 1680-2009, IEEE Standard for Environmental Assessment of Personal Computer Products, Including Laptop Personal 
                                                                   Computers, Desktop Personal Computers, and Personal Computer Monitors.” 2009. 
                                                               14 For more information on the Working Forest Fund, see https://www.conservationfund.org/our-work/working-forest-fund. 
                                                               15 Maine Forest Products Council. “Maine’s Forest Economy.” 2014. http://maineforest.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Maines-Forest-Economy.pdf 
                                                               16 World Wildlife Fund: Global Forest & Trade Network. “The Impact of Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) Certification.” 2014.  
                                                                   http://d2ouvy59p0dg6k.cloudfront.net/downloads/fsc_research_review.pdf. 
                                                               17 Also translated to National Forest Protection Program. 
                                                               18 World Resources Institute. “Global Forest Watch: China.” 2015. http://www.globalforestwatch.org/country/CHN. 
                                                               19 WWF China. “Green Me! Campaign Video.” 2017. https://vimeo.com/214545724.
                                                               Apple’s Paper and Packaging Strategy  |  October 2017                                                                                                                                                                               11
