                               ONTHEELECTRODYNAMICSOFMOVING
                                                              BODIES
                                                          ByA.EINSTEIN
                                                            June 30, 1905
                                 It is known that Maxwell’s electrodynamics—as usually understood at the
                              present time—when applied to moving bodies, leads to asymmetries which do
                              not appear to be inherent in the phenomena. Take, for example, the recipro-
                              cal electrodynamic action of a magnet and a conductor. The observable phe-
                              nomenon here depends only on the relative motion of the conductor and the
                              magnet, whereas the customary view draws a sharp distinction between the two
                              cases in which either the one or the other of these bodies is in motion. For if the
                              magnet is in motion and the conductor at rest, there arises in the neighbour-
                              hood of the magnet an electric ﬁeld with a certain deﬁnite energy, producing
                              a current at the places where parts of the conductor are situated. But if the
                              magnet is stationary and the conductor in motion, no electric ﬁeld arises in the
                              neighbourhood of the magnet. In the conductor, however, we ﬁnd an electro-
                              motive force, to which in itself there is no corresponding energy, but which gives
                              rise—assuming equality of relative motion in the two cases discussed—to elec-
                              tric currents of the same path and intensity as those produced by the electric
                              forces in the former case.
                                 Examples of this sort, together with the unsuccessful attempts to discover
                              any motion of the earth relatively to the “light medium,” suggest that the
                              phenomena of electrodynamics as well as of mechanics possess no properties
                              corresponding to the idea of absolute rest. They suggest rather that, as has
                              already been shown to the ﬁrst order of small quantities, the same laws of
                              electrodynamics and optics will be valid for all frames of reference for which the
                                                                1
                              equations of mechanics hold good.   We will raise this conjecture (the purport
                              of which will hereafter be called the “Principle of Relativity”) to the status
                              of a postulate, and also introduce another postulate, which is only apparently
                              irreconcilable with the former, namely, that light is always propagated in empty
                              space with a deﬁnite velocity c which is independent of the state of motion of the
                              emitting body. These two postulates suﬃce for the attainment of a simple and
                              consistent theory of the electrodynamics of moving bodies based on Maxwell’s
                              theory for stationary bodies. The introduction of a “luminiferous ether” will
                              prove to be superﬂuous inasmuch as the view here to be developed will not
                              require an “absolutely stationary space” provided with special properties, nor
                                 1The preceding memoir by Lorentz was not at this time known to the author.
                                                                    1
                              assign a velocity-vector to a point of the empty space in which electromagnetic
                              processes take place.
                                  The theory to be developed is based—like all electrodynamics—on the kine-
                              matics of the rigid body, since the assertions of any such theory have to do
                              with the relationships between rigid bodies (systems of co-ordinates), clocks,
                              and electromagnetic processes. Insuﬃcient consideration of this circumstance
                              lies at the root of the diﬃculties which the electrodynamics of moving bodies
                              at present encounters.
                                                I. KINEMATICAL PART
                                                 § 1. Deﬁnition of Simultaneity
                                  Let us take a system of co-ordinates in which the equations of Newtonian
                                                    2
                              mechanics hold good.    In order to render our presentation more precise and
                              to distinguish this system of co-ordinates verbally from others which will be
                              introduced hereafter, we call it the “stationary system.”
                                  If a material point is at rest relatively to this system of co-ordinates, its
                              position can be deﬁned relatively thereto by the employment of rigid standards
                              of measurement and the methods of Euclidean geometry, and can be expressed
                              in Cartesian co-ordinates.
                                  If we wish to describe the motion of a material point, we give the values of
                              its co-ordinates as functions of the time. Now we must bear carefully in mind
                              that a mathematical description of this kind has no physical meaning unless
                              we are quite clear as to what we understand by “time.” We have to take into
                              account that all our judgments in which time plays a part are always judgments
                              of simultaneous events. If, for instance, I say, “That train arrives here at 7
                              o’clock,” I mean something like this: “The pointing of the small hand of my
                                                                                             3
                              watch to 7 and the arrival of the train are simultaneous events.”
                                  It might appear possible to overcome all the diﬃculties attending the deﬁni-
                              tion of “time” by substituting “the position of the small hand of my watch” for
                              “time.” And in fact such a deﬁnition is satisfactory when we are concerned with
                              deﬁning a time exclusively for the place where the watch is located; but it is no
                              longer satisfactory when we have to connect in time series of events occurring
                              at diﬀerent places, or—what comes to the same thing—to evaluate the times of
                              events occurring at places remote from the watch.
                                  We might, of course, content ourselves with time values determined by an
                              observer stationed together with the watch at the origin of the co-ordinates,
                              and co-ordinating the corresponding positions of the hands with light signals,
                              given out by every event to be timed, and reaching him through empty space.
                              But this co-ordination has the disadvantage that it is not independent of the
                              standpoint of the observer with the watch or clock, as we know from experience.
                                 2i.e. to the ﬁrst approximation.
                                 3We shall not here discuss the inexactitude which lurks in the concept of simultaneity of
                              two events at approximately the same place, which can only be removed by an abstraction.
                                                                    2
                                              We arrive at a much more practical determination along the following line of
                                              thought.
                                                   If at the point A of space there is a clock, an observer at A can determine the
                                              time values of events in the immediate proximity of A by ﬁnding the positions
                                              of the hands which are simultaneous with these events. If there is at the point B
                                              of space another clock in all respects resembling the one at A, it is possible for
                                              an observer at B to determine the time values of events in the immediate neigh-
                                              bourhood of B. But it is not possible without further assumption to compare,
                                              in respect of time, an event at A with an event at B. We have so far deﬁned
                                              only an “A time” and a “B time.” We have not deﬁned a common “time” for
                                              AandB,forthe latter cannot be deﬁned at all unless we establish by deﬁnition
                                              that the “time” required by light to travel from A to B equals the “time” it
                                              requires to travel from B to A. Let a ray of light start at the “A time” tA from
                                              Atowards B, let it at the “B time” tB be reﬂected at B in the direction of A,
                                              and arrive again at A at the “A time” t′ .
                                                                                                         A
                                                   In accordance with deﬁnition the two clocks synchronize if
                                                                                           tB −tA = t′ −tB.
                                                                                                           A
                                                   We assume that this deﬁnition of synchronism is free from contradictions,
                                              and possible for any number of points; and that the following relations are
                                              universally valid:—
                                                   1. If the clock at B synchronizes with the clock at A, the clock at A syn-
                                              chronizes with the clock at B.
                                                   2. If the clock at A synchronizes with the clock at B and also with the clock
                                              at C, the clocks at B and C also synchronize with each other.
                                                   Thus with the help of certain imaginary physical experiments we have set-
                                              tled what is to be understood by synchronous stationary clocks located at dif-
                                              ferent places, and have evidently obtained a deﬁnition of “simultaneous,” or
                                              “synchronous,” and of “time.” The “time” of an event is that which is given
                                              simultaneously with the event by a stationary clock located at the place of
                                              the event, this clock being synchronous, and indeed synchronous for all time
                                              determinations, with a speciﬁed stationary clock.
                                                   In agreement with experience we further assume the quantity
                                                                                                 2AB =c,
                                                                                               t′  −tA
                                                                                                 A
                                              to be a universal constant—the velocity of light in empty space.
                                                   It is essential to have time deﬁned by means of stationary clocks in the
                                              stationary system, and the time now deﬁned being appropriate to the stationary
                                              system we call it “the time of the stationary system.”
                                                            § 2. On the Relativity of Lengths and Times
                                                   The following reﬂexions are based on the principle of relativity and on the
                                              principle of the constancy of the velocity of light. These two principles we deﬁne
                                              as follows:—
                                                                                                       3
                                  1. The laws by which the states of physical systems undergo change are not
                              aﬀected, whether these changes of state be referred to the one or the other of
                              two systems of co-ordinates in uniform translatory motion.
                                  2. Any ray of light moves in the “stationary” system of co-ordinates with
                              the determined velocity c, whether the ray be emitted by a stationary or by a
                              moving body. Hence
                                                         velocity =  light path
                                                                    time interval
                              where time interval is to be taken in the sense of the deﬁnition in § 1.
                                  Let there be given a stationary rigid rod; and let its length be l as measured
                              by a measuring-rod which is also stationary. We now imagine the axis of the
                              rod lying along the axis of x of the stationary system of co-ordinates, and that
                              a uniform motion of parallel translation with velocity v along the axis of x in
                              the direction of increasing x is then imparted to the rod. We now inquire as to
                              the length of the moving rod, and imagine its length to be ascertained by the
                              following two operations:—
                                  (a) The observer moves together with the given measuring-rod and the rod
                              to be measured, and measures the length of the rod directly by superposing the
                              measuring-rod, in just the same way as if all three were at rest.
                                  (b) By means of stationary clocks set up in the stationary system and syn-
                              chronizing in accordance with § 1, the observer ascertains at what points of the
                              stationary system the two ends of the rod to be measured are located at a deﬁnite
                              time. The distance between these two points, measured by the measuring-rod
                              already employed, which in this case is at rest, is also a length which may be
                              designated “the length of the rod.”
                                  In accordance with the principle of relativity the length to be discovered by
                              the operation (a)—we will call it “the length of the rod in the moving system”—
                              must be equal to the length l of the stationary rod.
                                  The length to be discovered by the operation (b) we will call “the length
                              of the (moving) rod in the stationary system.” This we shall determine on the
                              basis of our two principles, and we shall ﬁnd that it diﬀers from l.
                                  Current kinematics tacitly assumes that the lengths determined by these two
                              operations are precisely equal, or in other words, that a moving rigid body at
                              the epoch t may in geometrical respects be perfectly represented by the same
                              body at rest in a deﬁnite position.
                                  We imagine further that at the two ends A and B of the rod, clocks are
                              placed which synchronize with the clocks of the stationary system, that is to say
                              that their indications correspond at any instant to the “time of the stationary
                              system” at the places where they happen to be. These clocks are therefore
                              “synchronous in the stationary system.”
                                  We imagine further that with each clock there is a moving observer, and
                              that these observers apply to both clocks the criterion established in § 1 for the
                                                                                                       4
                              synchronization of two clocks. Let a ray of light depart from A at the time tA,
                                 4“Time” here denotes “time of the stationary system” and also “position of hands of the
                              moving clock situated at the place under discussion.”
                                                                    4
                          let it be reﬂected at B at the time tB, and reach A again at the time t′ . Taking
                                                                                  A
                          into consideration the principle of the constancy of the velocity of light we ﬁnd
                          that
                                           t −t = rAB and t′ −t = rAB
                                            B   A   c −v     A   B   c +v
                          where rAB denotes the length of the moving rod—measured in the stationary
                          system. Observers moving with the moving rod would thus ﬁnd that the two
                          clocks were not synchronous, while observers in the stationary system would
                          declare the clocks to be synchronous.
                            So we see that we cannot attach any absolute signiﬁcation to the concept of
                          simultaneity, but that two events which, viewed from a system of co-ordinates,
                          are simultaneous, can no longer be looked upon as simultaneous events when
                          envisaged from a system which is in motion relatively to that system.
                            § 3. Theory of the Transformation of Co-ordinates and
                            Times from a Stationary System to another System in
                           Uniform Motion of Translation Relatively to the Former
                            Let us in “stationary” space take two systems of co-ordinates, i.e. two sys-
                          tems, each of three rigid material lines, perpendicular to one another, and issuing
                          from a point. Let the axes of X of the two systems coincide, and their axes of
                          Y and Z respectively be parallel. Let each system be provided with a rigid
                          measuring-rod and a number of clocks, and let the two measuring-rods, and
                          likewise all the clocks of the two systems, be in all respects alike.
                            Now to the origin of one of the two systems (k) let a constant velocity v
                          be imparted in the direction of the increasing x of the other stationary system
                          (K), and let this velocity be communicated to the axes of the co-ordinates, the
                          relevant measuring-rod, and the clocks. To any time of the stationary system K
                          there then will correspond a deﬁnite position of the axes of the moving system,
                          and from reasons of symmetry we are entitled to assume that the motion of k
                          maybesuchthattheaxesofthemovingsystemareatthetimet(this“t”always
                          denotes a time of the stationary system) parallel to the axes of the stationary
                          system.
                            We now imagine space to be measured from the stationary system K by
                          means of the stationary measuring-rod, and also from the moving system k
                          by means of the measuring-rod moving with it; and that we thus obtain the
                          co-ordinates x, y, z, and ξ, η, ζ respectively. Further, let the time t of the
                          stationary system be determined for all points thereof at which there are clocks
                          by means of light signals in the manner indicated in § 1; similarly let the time
                          τ of the moving system be determined for all points of the moving system at
                          which there are clocks at rest relatively to that system by applying the method,
                          given in § 1, of light signals between the points at which the latter clocks are
                          located.
                            To any system of values x, y, z, t, which completely deﬁnes the place and
                          time of an event in the stationary system, there belongs a system of values ξ,
                                                          5
                                  η, ζ, τ, determining that event relatively to the system k, and our task is now
                                  to ﬁnd the system of equations connecting these quantities.
                                      In the ﬁrst place it is clear that the equations must be linear on account of
                                  the properties of homogeneity which we attribute to space and time.
                                                    ′
                                      If we place x = x−vt, it is clear that a point at rest in the system k must
                                                               ′
                                  have a system of values x , y, z, independent of time. We ﬁrst deﬁne τ as a
                                                ′
                                  function of x , y, z, and t. To do this we have to express in equations that τ is
                                  nothing else than the summary of the data of clocks at rest in system k, which
                                  have been synchronized according to the rule given in § 1.
                                      From the origin of system k let a ray be emitted at the time τ0 along the
                                               ′
                                  X-axis to x , and at the time τ be reﬂected thence to the origin of the co-
                                                                      1
                                  ordinates, arriving there at the time τ ; we then must have 1(τ +τ ) = τ , or,
                                                                            2                       2   0    2     1
                                  by inserting the arguments of the function τ and applying the principle of the
                                  constancy of the velocity of light in the stationary system:—
                                                                        ′        ′                        ′  
                                      1                                  x        x               ′           x
                                      2 τ(0,0,0,t)+τ 0,0,0,t+ c−v + c+v                   =τ x,0,0,t+ c−v .
                                              ′
                                  Hence, if x be chosen inﬁnitesimally small,
                                                       1  1 + 1 ∂τ = ∂τ + 1 ∂τ,
                                                                                      ′
                                                       2   c −v     c +v     ∂t    ∂x      c −v ∂t
                                  or
                                                                  ∂τ +      v    ∂τ =0.
                                                                     ′    2     2
                                                                  ∂x     c −v ∂t
                                      It is to be noted that instead of the origin of the co-ordinates we might have
                                  chosen any other point for the point of origin of the ray, and the equation just
                                                                                   ′
                                  obtained is therefore valid for all values of x , y, z.
                                      Ananalogous consideration—applied to the axes of Y and Z—it being borne
                                  in mind that light is always propagated along these axes, when viewed from the
                                                                           √ 2     2
                                  stationary system, with the velocity       c −v gives us
                                                                     ∂τ =0, ∂τ = 0.
                                                                     ∂y       ∂z
                                  Since τ is a linear function, it follows from these equations that
                                                                                v     ′
                                                                 τ = a t− 2         2x
                                                                              c −v
                                  where a is a function φ(v) at present unknown, and where for brevity it is
                                  assumed that at the origin of k, τ = 0, when t = 0.
                                      With the help of this result we easily determine the quantities ξ, η, ζ by
                                  expressing in equations that light (as required by the principle of the constancy
                                  of the velocity of light, in combination with the principle of relativity) is also
                                                                             6
                               propagated with velocity c when measured in the moving system. For a ray of
                               light emitted at the time τ = 0 in the direction of the increasing ξ
                                                                            v     ′
                                                     ξ = cτ or ξ = ac  t − 2    2x   .
                                                                          c −v
                               But the ray moves relatively to the initial point of k, when measured in the
                               stationary system, with the velocity c − v, so that
                                                                   ′
                                                                  x   =t.
                                                                 c −v
                               If we insert this value of t in the equation for ξ, we obtain
                                                                       2
                                                                      c     ′
                                                              ξ = a 2    2x.
                                                                   c −v
                               In an analogous manner we ﬁnd, by considering rays moving along the two other
                               axes, that
                                                                           v    ′
                                                       η = cτ = ac t− 2        2x
                                                                         c −v
                               when
                                                           √ y             ′
                                                                     =t, x =0.
                                                              2    2
                                                             c −v
                               Thus
                                                   η = a√ c      y and ζ = a√ c       z.
                                                           2    2               2    2
                                                          c −v                 c −v
                                                    ′
                                  Substituting for x its value, we obtain
                                                                               2
                                                         τ  = φ(v)β(t−vx/c ),
                                                         ξ  = φ(v)β(x−vt),
                                                         η  = φ(v)y,
                                                         ζ  = φ(v)z,
                               where
                                                             β = p     1     ,
                                                                         2  2
                                                                    1−v /c
                               and φ is an as yet unknown function of v. If no assumption whatever be made
                               as to the initial position of the moving system and as to the zero point of τ, an
                               additive constant is to be placed on the right side of each of these equations.
                                                                     7
                                  Wenowhavetoprovethatanyrayoflight, measured in the moving system,
                              is propagated with the velocity c, if, as we have assumed, this is the case in the
                              stationary system; for we have not as yet furnished the proof that the principle
                              of the constancy of the velocity of light is compatible with the principle of
                              relativity.
                                  At the time t = τ = 0, when the origin of the co-ordinates is common to the
                              two systems, let a spherical wave be emitted therefrom, and be propagated with
                              the velocity c in system K. If (x,y,z) be a point just attained by this wave,
                              then
                                                            2    2    2    2 2
                                                           x +y +z =c t .
                                  Transforming this equation with the aid of our equations of transformation
                              we obtain after a simple calculation
                                                            2    2    2    2 2
                                                           ξ +η +ζ =c τ .
                                  The wave under consideration is therefore no less a spherical wave with
                              velocity of propagation c when viewed in the moving system. This shows that
                                                                            5
                              our two fundamental principles are compatible.
                                  In the equations of transformation which have been developed there enters
                              an unknown function φ of v, which we will now determine.
                                                                                                ′
                                  For this purpose we introduce a third system of co-ordinates K , which rel-
                              atively to the system k is in a state of parallel translatory motion parallel to
                                            †                                                 ′
                              the axis of Ξ, such that the origin of co-ordinates of system K moves with
                              velocity −v on the axis of Ξ. At the time t = 0 let all three origins coincide, and
                              when t = x = y = z = 0 let the time t′ of the system K′ be zero. We call the
                                                                     ′  ′  ′  ′
                              co-ordinates, measured in the system K , x , y , z , and by a twofold application
                              of our equations of transformation we obtain
                                             ′                           2
                                            t ′ = φ(−v)β(−v)(τ +vξ/c ) = φ(v)φ(−v)t,
                                            x   = φ(−v)β(−v)(ξ+vτ)           = φ(v)φ(−v)x,
                                            y′  = φ(−v)η                     = φ(v)φ(−v)y,
                                            z′  = φ(−v)ζ                     = φ(v)φ(−v)z.
                                                              ′   ′  ′
                                  Since the relations between x , y , z and x, y, z do not contain the time t,
                              the systems K and K′ are at rest with respect to one another, and it is clear that
                                                              ′
                              the transformation from K to K must be the identical transformation. Thus
                                                             φ(v)φ(−v) = 1.
                                 5The equations of the Lorentz transformation may be more simply deduced directly from
                                                                                 2   2   2    2 2
                              the condition that in virtue of those equations the relation x + y + z = c t shall have as
                                                             2   2   2    2 2
                              its consequence the second relation ξ +η +ζ = c τ .
                                 †Editor’s note: In Einstein’s original paper, the symbols (Ξ,H,Z) for the co-ordinates of the
                              moving system k were introduced without explicitly deﬁning them. In the 1923 English translation,
                              (X,Y,Z) were used, creating an ambiguity between X co-ordinates in the ﬁxed system K and the
                              parallel axis in moving system k. Here and in subsequent references we use Ξ when referring to the
                              axis of system k along which the system is translating with respect to K. In addition, the reference
                              to system K′ later in this sentence was incorrectly given as “k” in the 1923 English translation.
                                                                    8
                              We now inquire into the signiﬁcation of φ(v). We give our attention to that
                              part of the axis of Y of system k which lies between ξ = 0,η = 0,ζ = 0 and
                              ξ = 0,η = l,ζ = 0. This part of the axis of Y is a rod moving perpendicularly
                              to its axis with velocity v relatively to system K. Its ends possess in K the
                              co-ordinates
                                                        x =vt, y = l , z =0
                                                         1        1   φ(v)   1
                              and
                                                         x =vt, y =0, z =0.
                                                          2        2       2
                              The length of the rod measured in K is therefore l/φ(v); and this gives us the
                              meaning of the function φ(v). From reasons of symmetry it is now evident that
                              the length of a given rod moving perpendicularly to its axis, measured in the
                              stationary system, must depend only on the velocity and not on the direction
                              and the sense of the motion. The length of the moving rod measured in the
                              stationary system does not change, therefore, if v and −v are interchanged.
                              Hence follows that l/φ(v) = l/φ(−v), or
                                                              φ(v) = φ(−v).
                              It follows from this relation and the one previously found that φ(v) = 1, so that
                              the transformation equations which have been found become
                                                                            2
                                                           τ  = β(t−vx/c ),
                                                           ξ  = β(x−vt),
                                                           η  = y,
                                                           ζ  = z,
                              where
                                                                  p      2  2
                                                            β =1/ 1−v /c .
                                  § 4. Physical Meaning of the Equations Obtained in
                                  Respect to Moving Rigid Bodies and Moving Clocks
                                  We envisage a rigid sphere6 of radius R, at rest relatively to the moving
                              system k, and with its centre at the origin of co-ordinates of k. The equation of
                              the surface of this sphere moving relatively to the system K with velocity v is
                                                             2    2    2    2
                                                            ξ +η +ζ =R .
                                 6That is, a body possessing spherical form when examined at rest.
                                                                    9
                              The equation of this surface expressed in x, y, z at the time t = 0 is
                                                             2
                                                       p x           +y2+z2=R2.
                                                              2  2 2
                                                      (  1−v /c )
                              A rigid body which, measured in a state of rest, has the form of a sphere,
                              therefore has in a state of motion—viewed from the stationary system—the
                              form of an ellipsoid of revolution with the axes
                                                            p       2  2
                                                           R 1−v /c , R, R.
                                  Thus, whereas the Y and Z dimensions of the sphere (and therefore of every
                              rigid body of no matter what form) do not appear modiﬁed by the motion, the
                                                                            p       2  2
                              Xdimension appears shortened in the ratio 1 :    1−v /c , i.e. the greater the
                              value of v, the greater the shortening. For v = c all moving objects—viewed from
                                                                                    †
                              the “stationary” system—shrivel up into plane ﬁgures.    For velocities greater
                              than that of light our deliberations become meaningless; we shall, however, ﬁnd
                              in what follows, that the velocity of light in our theory plays the part, physically,
                              of an inﬁnitely great velocity.
                                  It is clear that the same results hold good of bodies at rest in the “stationary”
                              system, viewed from a system in uniform motion.
                                  Further, we imagine one of the clocks which are qualiﬁed to mark the time
                              t when at rest relatively to the stationary system, and the time τ when at rest
                              relatively to the moving system, to be located at the origin of the co-ordinates
                              of k, and so adjusted that it marks the time τ. What is the rate of this clock,
                              when viewed from the stationary system?
                                  Between the quantities x, t, and τ, which refer to the position of the clock,
                              we have, evidently, x = vt and
                                                       τ = p     1     (t − vx/c2).
                                                                   2  2
                                                              1−v /c
                              Therefore,
                                                      p      2  2           p      2  2
                                                 τ = t  1−v /c =t−(1− 1−v /c )t
                              whence it follows that the time marked by the clock (viewed in the stationary
                                                     p       2  2
                              system) is slow by 1 −    1−v /c seconds per second, or—neglecting magni-
                                                                   1 2   2
                              tudes of fourth and higher order—by 2v /c .
                                  Fromthis there ensues the following peculiar consequence. If at the points A
                              and B of K there are stationary clocks which, viewed in the stationary system,
                              are synchronous; and if the clock at A is moved with the velocity v along the
                              line AB to B, then on its arrival at B the two clocks no longer synchronize,
                              but the clock moved from A to B lags behind the other which has remained at
                                 †Editor’s note: In the 1923 English translation, this phrase was erroneously translated as “plain
                              ﬁgures”. I have used the correct “plane ﬁgures” in this edition.
                                                                    10
                                    1  2  2
                              B by 2tv /c (up to magnitudes of fourth and higher order), t being the time
                              occupied in the journey from A to B.
                                  It is at once apparent that this result still holds good if the clock moves from
                              Ato B in any polygonal line, and also when the points A and B coincide.
                                  If we assume that the result proved for a polygonal line is also valid for a
                              continuously curved line, we arrive at this result: If one of two synchronous
                              clocks at A is moved in a closed curve with constant velocity until it returns to
                              A, the journey lasting t seconds, then by the clock which has remained at rest
                                                                            1  2  2
                              the travelled clock on its arrival at A will be 2tv /c second slow. Thence we
                                                           7
                              conclude that a balance-clock at the equator must go more slowly, by a very
                              small amount, than a precisely similar clock situated at one of the poles under
                              otherwise identical conditions.
                                              § 5. The Composition of Velocities
                                  In the system k moving along the axis of X of the system K with velocity v,
                              let a point move in accordance with the equations
                                                         ξ = w τ,η = w τ,ζ = 0,
                                                               ξ        η
                              where w and w denote constants.
                                      ξ       η
                                  Required: the motion of the point relatively to the system K. If with the help
                              of the equations of transformation developed in § 3 we introduce the quantities
                              x, y, z, t into the equations of motion of the point, we obtain
                                                                    w +v
                                                        x   =         ξ      t,
                                                                           2
                                                                  1+vw /c
                                                                  p ξ
                                                                         2  2
                                                        y   =       1−v /c w t,
                                                                            2  η
                                                                  1+vw /c
                                                                         ξ
                                                        z  =0.
                                  Thus the law of the parallelogram of velocities is valid according to our
                              theory only to a ﬁrst approximation. We set
                                                                   
                                                                  dx 2      dy 2
                                                       V2 =             +         ,
                                                                  dt        dt
                                                       w2 = w2+w2,
                                                                  ξ    η
                                                                   −1        †
                                                         a = tan w /w ,
                                                                        η  ξ
                                 7Not a pendulum-clock, which is physically a system to which the Earth belongs. This
                              case had to be excluded.
                                 †Editor’s note: This equation was incorrectly given in Einstein’s original paper and the 1923
                              English translation as a = tan−1 wy/wx.
                                                                    11
                              a is then to be looked upon as the angle between the velocities v and w. After
                              a simple calculation we obtain
                                                   p 2       2                          2
                                              V =     (v +w +2vwcosa)−(vwsina/c) .
                                                                             2
                                                               1+vwcosa/c
                              It is worthy of remark that v and w enter into the expression for the resultant
                              velocity in a symmetrical manner. If w also has the direction of the axis of X,
                              we get
                                                             V =    v +w .
                                                                  1+vw/c2
                              It follows from this equation that from a composition of two velocities which
                              are less than c, there always results a velocity less than c. For if we set v =
                              c −κ,w =c−λ, κ and λ being positive and less than c, then
                                                      V =c      2c−κ−λ        <c.
                                                            2c−κ−λ+κλ/c
                                 It follows, further, that the velocity of light c cannot be altered by compo-
                              sition with a velocity less than that of light. For this case we obtain
                                                            V = c+w =c.
                                                                 1+w/c
                              Wemightalso have obtained the formula for V, for the case when v and w have
                              the same direction, by compounding two transformations in accordance with §
                              3. If in addition to the systems K and k ﬁguring in § 3 we introduce still another
                              system of co-ordinates k′ moving parallel to k, its initial point moving on the
                                       †
                              axis of Ξ with the velocity w, we obtain equations between the quantities x,
                              y, z, t and the corresponding quantities of k′, which diﬀer from the equations
                              found in § 3 only in that the place of “v” is taken by the quantity
                                                                 v +w ;
                                                               1+vw/c2
                              fromwhichweseethatsuchparalleltransformations—necessarily—formagroup.
                                 We have now deduced the requisite laws of the theory of kinematics cor-
                              responding to our two principles, and we proceed to show their application to
                              electrodynamics.
                                        II. ELECTRODYNAMICAL PART
                                § 6. Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz Equations for
                               Empty Space. On the Nature of the Electromotive Forces
                                      Occurring in a Magnetic Field During Motion
                                 Let the Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space hold good for the station-
                              ary system K, so that we have
                                 †Editor’s note: “X” in the 1923 English translation.
                                                                   12
                                                    1∂X = ∂N − ∂M, 1∂L = ∂Y − ∂Z,
                                                    c ∂t           ∂y       ∂z      c ∂t           ∂z       ∂y
                                                    1∂Y = ∂L − ∂N, 1∂M = ∂Z − ∂X,
                                                    c ∂t           ∂z      ∂x       c ∂t           ∂x       ∂z
                                                    1∂Z = ∂M − ∂L, 1∂N = ∂X − ∂Y,
                                                    c ∂t           ∂x       ∂y      c ∂t           ∂y       ∂x
                                    where (X, Y, Z) denotes the vector of the electric force, and (L, M, N) that of
                                    the magnetic force.
                                        If we apply to these equations the transformation developed in § 3, by re-
                                    ferring the electromagnetic processes to the system of co-ordinates there intro-
                                    duced, moving with the velocity v, we obtain the equations
                                                           1 ∂X          ∂ n           v   o       ∂ n            v  o
                                                           c ∂τ    = ∂η β N− cY                   −∂ζ β M+ cZ ,
                                       1 ∂ n            v   o         ∂L                           ∂ n            v   o
                                       c ∂τ   β Y−cN               = ∂ξ                           −∂ζ β N− cY ,
                                       1 ∂ n            v   o          ∂ n           v   o       ∂L
                                       c ∂τ   β Z+cM               = ∂ξ β M+cZ                    −∂η,
                                                           1 ∂L          ∂ n           v   o       ∂ n           v    o
                                                           c ∂τ    = ∂ζ β Y− cN                   −∂η β Z+ cM ,
                                       1 ∂ n            v   o          ∂ n          v    o       ∂X
                                       c ∂τ   β M+cZ               = ∂ξ β Z+ cM                   −∂ζ,
                                       1 ∂ n            v   o         ∂X                           ∂ n            v  o
                                       c ∂τ   β N−cY               = ∂η                           −∂ξ β Y− cN ,
                                    where
                                                                               p        2  2
                                                                       β =1/ 1−v /c .
                                        Now the principle of relativity requires that if the Maxwell-Hertz equations
                                    for empty space hold good in system K, they also hold good in system k; that
                                                                                                                     ′    ′   ′
                                    is to say that the vectors of the electric and the magnetic force—(X , Y , Z )
                                            ′    ′   ′
                                    and (L , M , N )—of the moving system k, which are deﬁned by their pondero-
                                    motive eﬀects on electric or magnetic masses respectively, satisfy the following
                                    equations:—
                                                       ′             ′         ′         ′             ′        ′
                                                  1∂X      = ∂N −∂M, 1∂L = ∂Y −∂Z,
                                                  c ∂τ            ∂η        ∂ζ      c ∂τ            ∂ζ        ∂η
                                                       ′             ′        ′           ′            ′        ′
                                                  1∂Y      = ∂L −∂N, 1∂M = ∂Z −∂X,
                                                  c ∂τ            ∂ζ        ∂ξ      c ∂τ            ∂ξ        ∂ζ
                                                       ′             ′         ′          ′            ′         ′
                                                  1∂Z      = ∂M −∂L, 1∂N = ∂X −∂Y.
                                                  c ∂τ            ∂ξ        ∂η      c ∂τ            ∂η        ∂ξ
                                                                                 13
                                 Evidently the two systems of equations found for system k must express
                              exactly the same thing, since both systems of equations are equivalent to the
                              Maxwell-Hertz equations for system K. Since, further, the equations of the two
                              systems agree, with the exception of the symbols for the vectors, it follows that
                              the functions occurring in the systems of equations at corresponding places must
                              agree, with the exception of a factor ψ(v), which is common for all functions
                              of the one system of equations, and is independent of ξ,η,ζ and τ but depends
                              upon v. Thus we have the relations
                                            ′                          ′
                                          X = ψ(v)X,                  L   = ψ(v)L,
                                            ′                 v       ′                  v 
                                          Y = ψ(v)β Y− cN , M = ψ(v)β M+ cZ ,
                                           ′                  v       ′                  v  
                                          Z   = ψ(v)β Z+ cM , N           = ψ(v)β N− cY .
                                 If we now form the reciprocal of this system of equations, ﬁrstly by solving
                              the equations just obtained, and secondly by applying the equations to the
                              inverse transformation (from k to K), which is characterized by the velocity −v,
                              it follows, when we consider that the two systems of equations thus obtained
                                                                                                         8
                              must be identical, that ψ(v)ψ(−v) = 1. Further, from reasons of symmetry
                              and therefore
                                                                ψ(v) = 1,
                              and our equations assume the form
                                                ′                      ′
                                              X = X,                  L   = L,
                                                ′             v       ′              v 
                                              Y = β Y−cN , M = β M+cZ ,
                                                ′             v       ′             v  
                                              Z    = β Z+cM , N = β N−cY .
                              As to the interpretation of these equations we make the following remarks: Let
                              a point charge of electricity have the magnitude “one” when measured in the
                              stationary system K, i.e. let it when at rest in the stationary system exert a
                              force of one dyne upon an equal quantity of electricity at a distance of one cm.
                              By the principle of relativity this electric charge is also of the magnitude “one”
                              when measured in the moving system. If this quantity of electricity is at rest
                              relatively to the stationary system, then by deﬁnition the vector (X, Y, Z) is
                              equal to the force acting upon it. If the quantity of electricity is at rest relatively
                              to the moving system (at least at the relevant instant), then the force acting
                                                                                                 ′   ′  ′
                              upon it, measured in the moving system, is equal to the vector (X , Y , Z ).
                              Consequently the ﬁrst three equations above allow themselves to be clothed in
                              words in the two following ways:—
                                 1. If a unit electric point charge is in motion in an electromagnetic ﬁeld,
                              there acts upon it, in addition to the electric force, an “electromotive force”
                              which, if we neglect the terms multiplied by the second and higher powers of
                              v/c, is equal to the vector-product of the velocity of the charge and the magnetic
                              force, divided by the velocity of light. (Old manner of expression.)
                                 8If, for example, X=Y=Z=L=M=0, and N 6= 0, then from reasons of symmetry it is clear
                              that when v changes sign without changing its numerical value, Y′ must also change sign
                              without changing its numerical value.
                                                                   14
                          2. If a unit electric point charge is in motion in an electromagnetic ﬁeld,
                        the force acting upon it is equal to the electric force which is present at the
                        locality of the charge, and which we ascertain by transformation of the ﬁeld to
                        a system of co-ordinates at rest relatively to the electrical charge. (New manner
                        of expression.)
                          The analogy holds with “magnetomotive forces.” We see that electromotive
                        force plays in the developed theory merely the part of an auxiliary concept,
                        whichowesitsintroductiontothecircumstancethatelectricandmagneticforces
                        do not exist independently of the state of motion of the system of co-ordinates.
                          Furthermore it is clear that the asymmetry mentioned in the introduction
                        as arising when we consider the currents produced by the relative motion of a
                        magnet and a conductor, now disappears. Moreover, questions as to the “seat”
                        of electrodynamic electromotive forces (unipolar machines) now have no point.
                          § 7. Theory of Doppler’s Principle and of Aberration
                          In the system K, very far from the origin of co-ordinates, let there be a
                        source of electrodynamic waves, which in a part of space containing the origin
                        of co-ordinates may be represented to a suﬃcient degree of approximation by
                        the equations
                                          X=X sinΦ, L=L sinΦ,
                                               0          0
                                          Y=Y sinΦ, M=M sinΦ,
                                               0           0
                                          Z=Z0sinΦ,   N=N0sinΦ,
                        where
                                                  1           
                                          Φ=ω t−c(lx+my+nz) .
                        Here (X , Y , Z ) and (L , M , N ) are the vectors deﬁning the amplitude of
                              0  0  0      0   0  0
                        the wave-train, and l,m,n the direction-cosines of the wave-normals. We wish
                        to know the constitution of these waves, when they are examined by an observer
                        at rest in the moving system k.
                          Applying the equations of transformation found in § 6 for electric and mag-
                        netic forces, and those found in § 3 for the co-ordinates and the time, we obtain
                        directly
                                  ′       ′            ′        ′
                                X =X sinΦ,            L =L sinΦ,
                                      0                    0
                                  ′                ′    ′                 ′
                                Y =β(Y −vN /c)sinΦ, M =β(M +vZ /c)sinΦ,
                                       0    0                 0    0
                                 ′                 ′   ′                 ′
                                Z =β(Z +vM /c)sinΦ, N =β(N −vY /c)sinΦ,
                                       0    0               0   	0
                                          ′   ′    1 ′    ′    ′
                                         Φ =ω τ−c(lξ+mη+nζ)
                        where
                                             ω′  = ωβ(1−lv/c),
                                                     15
                                                                                                l′    = l−v/c ,
                                                                                                             1−lv/c
                                                                                                  ′                 m
                                                                                              m = β(1−lv/c),
                                                                                                  ′                  n
                                                                                               n      = β(1−lv/c).
                                                       Fromtheequationforω′ it follows that if an observer is moving with velocity
                                                  v relatively to an inﬁnitely distant source of light of frequency ν, in such a way
                                                  that the connecting line “source-observer” makes the angle φ with the velocity
                                                  of the observer referred to a system of co-ordinates which is at rest relatively
                                                  to the source of light, the frequency ν′ of the light perceived by the observer is
                                                  given by the equation
                                                                                                  ′       1−cosφ·v/c
                                                                                                ν =ν p                  2    2 .
                                                                                                               1−v /c
                                                  Thisis Doppler’s principle for any velocities whatever. When φ = 0 the equation
                                                  assumes the perspicuous form
                                                                                                   ν′ = νs1−v/c.
                                                                                                                 1+v/c
                                                  Wesee that, in contrast with the customary view, when v = −c,ν′ = ∞.
                                                       If we call the angle between the wave-normal (direction of the ray) in the
                                                                                                                                                  ′
                                                  moving system and the connecting line “source-observer” φ , the equation for
                                                    ′†
                                                  φ assumes the form
                                                                                                     ′        cosφ−v/c
                                                                                              cosφ = 1−cosφ·v/c.
                                                  This equation expresses the law of aberration in its most general form. If φ =
                                                  1π, the equation becomes simply
                                                  2
                                                                                                             ′
                                                                                                     cosφ =−v/c.
                                                       Westill have to ﬁnd the amplitude of the waves, as it appears in the moving
                                                                                                                                                                              ′
                                                  system. If we call the amplitude of the electric or magnetic force A or A
                                                  respectively, accordingly as it is measured in the stationary system or in the
                                                  moving system, we obtain
                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                            A′2 = A2(1−cosφ·v/c)
                                                                                                                         2    2
                                                                                                                1−v /c
                                                  which equation, if φ = 0, simpliﬁes into
                                                      †Editor’s note: Erroneously given as “l′” in the 1923 English translation, propagating an error,
                                                  despite a change in symbols, from the original 1905 paper.
                                                                                                               16
                                                 ′2  21−v/c
                                               A =A 1+v/c.
                          It follows from these results that to an observer approaching a source of light
                        with the velocity c, this source of light must appear of inﬁnite intensity.
                        § 8. Transformation of the Energy of Light Rays. Theory
                        of the Pressure of Radiation Exerted on Perfect Reﬂectors
                                2
                          Since A /8π equals the energy of light per unit of volume, we have to regard
                         ′2
                        A /8π,bytheprincipleofrelativity, as the energy of light in the moving system.
                              ′2 2
                        Thus A /A would be the ratio of the “measured in motion” to the “measured
                        at rest” energy of a given light complex, if the volume of a light complex were
                        the same, whether measured in K or in k. But this is not the case. If l,m,n are
                        the direction-cosines of the wave-normals of the light in the stationary system,
                        no energy passes through the surface elements of a spherical surface moving
                        with the velocity of light:—
                                            2          2        2    2
                                      (x−lct) +(y−mct) +(z−nct) =R .
                        We may therefore say that this surface permanently encloses the same light
                        complex. We inquire as to the quantity of energy enclosed by this surface,
                        viewed in system k, that is, as to the energy of the light complex relatively to
                        the system k.
                          The spherical surface—viewed in the moving system—is an ellipsoidal sur-
                        face, the equation for which, at the time τ = 0, is
                                           2             2           2    2
                                 (βξ −lβξv/c) +(η−mβξv/c) +(ζ −nβξv/c) =R .
                                                     ′
                        If S is the volume of the sphere, and S that of this ellipsoid, then by a simple
                        calculation
                                               ′   p     2 2
                                              S =    1−v /c .
                                               S   1−cosφ·v/c
                        Thus, if we call the light energy enclosed by this surface E when it is measured in
                                              ′
                        the stationary system, and E when measured in the moving system, we obtain
                                            ′    ′2 ′
                                           E   A S    1−cosφ·v/c
                                           E = A2S = p       2 2 ,
                                                         1−v /c
                        and this formula, when φ = 0, simpliﬁes into
                                                 ′  s
                                                E = 1−v/c.
                                                E     1+v/c
                                                     17
                                     It is remarkable that the energy and the frequency of a light complex vary
                                  with the state of motion of the observer in accordance with the same law.
                                     Now let the co-ordinate plane ξ = 0 be a perfectly reﬂecting surface, at
                                  which the plane waves considered in § 7 are reﬂected. We seek for the pressure
                                  of light exerted on the reﬂecting surface, and for the direction, frequency, and
                                  intensity of the light after reﬂexion.
                                     Let the incidental light be deﬁned by the quantities A, cosφ, ν (referred to
                                  system K). Viewed from k the corresponding quantities are
                                                                  ′         1−cosφ·v/c
                                                                A = A p              2  2 ,
                                                                               1−v /c
                                                                  ′         cosφ−v/c
                                                             cosφ    = 1−cosφ·v/c,
                                                                  ′        1−cosφ·v/c
                                                                 ν   = ν p           2  2 .
                                                                               1−v /c
                                  For the reﬂected light, referring the process to system k, we obtain
                                                                     A′′   = A′
                                                                       ′′              ′
                                                                  cosφ     = −cosφ
                                                                      ν′′  = ν′
                                  Finally, by transforming back to the stationary system K, we obtain for the
                                  reﬂected light
                                                                      ′′                               2   2
                                                 ′′′       ′′ 1 + cosφ · v/c       1−2cosφ·v/c+v /c
                                               A     = A p             2  2   =A                2  2        ,
                                                                 1−v /c                   1−v /c
                                                                 ′′                   2   2
                                                 ′′′       cosφ +v/c            (1+v /c )cosφ−2v/c
                                            cosφ     =             ′′      =−                        2  2,
                                                          1+cosφ ·v/c           1−2cosφ·v/c+v /c
                                                                      ′′                               2  2
                                                 ′′′       ′′ 1 + cosφ · v/c      1−2cosφ·v/c+v /c
                                               ν     = ν p            2   2   =ν               2   2        .
                                                                 1−v /c                   1−v /c
                                     The energy (measured in the stationary system) which is incident upon unit
                                                                                2
                                  area of the mirror in unit time is evidently A (ccosφ−v)/8π. The energy leaving
                                                                                               ′′′2        ′′′
                                  the unit of surface of the mirror in the unit of time is A      (−ccosφ +v)/8π.
                                  The diﬀerence of these two expressions is, by the principle of energy, the work
                                  done by the pressure of light in the unit of time. If we set down this work as
                                  equal to the product Pv, where P is the pressure of light, we obtain
                                                                         2              2
                                                               P=2·A (cosφ−v/c) .
                                                                                  2   2
                                                                       8π    1−v /c
                                                                           18
                          In agreement with experiment and with other theories, we obtain to a ﬁrst
                          approximation
                                                          A2
                                                    P=2·     cos2φ.
                                                          8π
                             All problems in the optics of moving bodies can be solved by the method
                          here employed. What is essential is, that the electric and magnetic force of the
                          light which is inﬂuenced by a moving body, be transformed into a system of
                          co-ordinates at rest relatively to the body. By this means all problems in the
                          optics of moving bodies will be reduced to a series of problems in the optics of
                          stationary bodies.
                             § 9. Transformation of the Maxwell-Hertz Equations
                              when Convection-Currents are Taken into Account
                             Westart from the equations
                                1 n∂X +uxρo = ∂N − ∂M, 1∂L = ∂Y − ∂Z,
                                c   ∂t               ∂y     ∂z    c ∂t      ∂z     ∂y
                                1 n∂Y +uyρo = ∂L − ∂N, 1∂M = ∂Z − ∂X,
                                c   ∂t               ∂z     ∂x   c ∂t       ∂x     ∂z
                                 1 n∂Z + uzρo = ∂M − ∂L, 1∂N = ∂X − ∂Y,
                                 c  ∂t                ∂x    ∂y    c ∂t      ∂y     ∂x
                          where
                                                   ρ = ∂X + ∂Y + ∂Z
                                                      ∂x    ∂y   ∂z
                          denotes 4π times the density of electricity, and (ux,uy,uz) the velocity-vector of
                          the charge. If we imagine the electric charges to be invariably coupled to small
                          rigid bodies (ions, electrons), these equations are the electromagnetic basis of
                          the Lorentzian electrodynamics and optics of moving bodies.
                             Let these equations be valid in the system K, and transform them, with the
                          assistance of the equations of transformation given in §§ 3 and 6, to the system
                          k. We then obtain the equations
                                n   ′        o         ′      ′       ′         ′     ′
                              1   ∂X +u ρ′      = ∂N −∂M, 1∂L = ∂Y −∂Z,
                               c  ∂τ      ξ          ∂η     ∂ζ    c ∂τ        ∂ζ    ∂η
                                n   ′        o         ′      ′       ′        ′      ′
                              1   ∂Y +u ρ′      = ∂L −∂N, 1∂M = ∂Z −∂X,
                              c   ∂τ      η          ∂ζ     ∂ξ    c ∂τ       ∂ξ     ∂ζ
                                n ′          o         ′      ′       ′        ′      ′
                               1  ∂Z +u ρ′      = ∂M −∂L, 1∂N = ∂X −∂Y,
                               c  ∂τ      ζ          ∂ξ     ∂η    c ∂τ       ∂η     ∂ξ
                          where
                                                          19
                                                       uξ  =     ux −v
                                                                        2
                                                               1−uxv/c
                                                       u   =         uy
                                                        η                  2
                                                               β(1−uxv/c )
                                                       u   =         uz      ,
                                                        ζ                  2
                                                               β(1−uxv/c )
                             and
                                                       ′      ∂X′   ∂Y′    ∂Z′
                                                      ρ   = ∂ξ + ∂η + ∂ζ
                                                                         2
                                                          = β(1−uxv/c )ρ.
                             Since—as follows from the theorem of addition of velocities (§ 5)—the vector
                             (uξ,uη,uζ) is nothing else than the velocity of the electric charge, measured in
                             the system k, we have the proof that, on the basis of our kinematical principles,
                             the electrodynamic foundation of Lorentz’s theory of the electrodynamics of
                             moving bodies is in agreement with the principle of relativity.
                                In addition I may brieﬂy remark that the following important law may easily
                             be deduced from the developed equations: If an electrically charged body is in
                             motion anywhere in space without altering its charge when regarded from a
                             system of co-ordinates moving with the body, its charge also remains—when
                             regarded from the “stationary” system K—constant.
                                  § 10. Dynamics of the Slowly Accelerated Electron
                                Let there be in motion in an electromagnetic ﬁeld an electrically charged
                             particle (in the sequel called an “electron”), for the law of motion of which we
                             assume as follows:—
                                If the electron is at rest at a given epoch, the motion of the electron ensues
                             in the next instant of time according to the equations
                                                             d2x
                                                           mdt2    = ǫX
                                                             d2y
                                                           mdt2    = ǫY
                                                             d2z
                                                           mdt2    = ǫZ
                             where x,y,z denote the co-ordinates of the electron, and m the mass of the
                             electron, as long as its motion is slow.
                                                                 20
                                      Now, secondly, let the velocity of the electron at a given epoch be v. We
                                  seek the law of motion of the electron in the immediately ensuing instants of
                                  time.
                                      Without aﬀecting the general character of our considerations, we may and
                                  will assume that the electron, at the moment when we give it our attention, is at
                                  the origin of the co-ordinates, and moves with the velocity v along the axis of X
                                  of the system K. It is then clear that at the given moment (t = 0) the electron
                                  is at rest relatively to a system of co-ordinates which is in parallel motion with
                                  velocity v along the axis of X.
                                      Fromtheaboveassumption,incombinationwiththeprincipleofrelativity, it
                                  is clear that in the immediately ensuing time (for small values of t) the electron,
                                  viewed from the system k, moves in accordance with the equations
                                                                       d2ξ
                                                                    mdτ2 = ǫX′,
                                                                       d2η
                                                                    mdτ2 = ǫY′,
                                                                       d2ζ
                                                                    mdτ2 = ǫZ′,
                                  in which the symbols ξ, η, ζ, X′, Y′, Z′ refer to the system k. If, further, we
                                  decide that when t = x = y = z = 0 then τ = ξ = η = ζ = 0, the transformation
                                  equations of §§ 3 and 6 hold good, so that we have
                                                                                                   2
                                                     ξ = β(x−vt),η = y,ζ = z,τ = β(t−vx/c ),
                                                    X′ = X,Y′ = β(Y−vN/c),Z′ = β(Z+vM/c).
                                      Withthehelpoftheseequationswetransformtheaboveequationsofmotion
                                  from system k to system K, and obtain                
                                                              2
                                                             d x   =     ǫ  X          
                                                               2          3
                                                             dt        mβ             
                                                              2
                                                             d y   = ǫ Y−vN                  ·      ·      ·       (A)
                                                               2
                                                             dt        mβ         c   
                                                              2                        
                                                             d z   = ǫ Z+vM
                                                               2
                                                             dt        mβ        c
                                      Taking the ordinary point of view we now inquire as to the “longitudinal”
                                  and the “transverse” mass of the moving electron. We write the equations (A)
                                  in the form
                                                               2
                                                             3d x                                ′
                                                         mβ 2 = ǫX                       = ǫX,
                                                               dt                    
                                                               2
                                                         mβ2d y     = ǫβ Y−vN = ǫY′,
                                                                2
                                                              dt                  c  
                                                               2
                                                             2d z                 v             ′
                                                         mβ 2 = ǫβ Z+ M = ǫZ,
                                                              dt                  c
                                                               ′     ′   ′
                                  and remark ﬁrstly that ǫX , ǫY , ǫZ are the components of the ponderomotive
                                  force acting upon the electron, and are so indeed as viewed in a system moving
                                  at the moment with the electron, with the same velocity as the electron. (This
                                  force might be measured, for example, by a spring balance at rest in the last-
                                  mentioned system.) Now if we call this force simply “the force acting upon the
                                                                            21
                                        9
                              electron,” and maintain the equation—mass × acceleration = force—and if we
                              also decide that the accelerations are to be measured in the stationary system
                              K, we derive from the above equations
                                                 Longitudinal mass   = p m              .
                                                                                  2  2 3
                                                                          (  1−v /c )
                                                   Transverse mass   =       m .
                                                                               2  2
                                                                          1−v /c
                                  With a diﬀerent deﬁnition of force and acceleration we should naturally
                              obtain other values for the masses. This shows us that in comparing diﬀerent
                              theories of the motion of the electron we must proceed very cautiously.
                                  We remark that these results as to the mass are also valid for ponderable
                              material points, because a ponderable material point can be made into an elec-
                              tron (in our sense of the word) by the addition of an electric charge, no matter
                              how small.
                                  We will now determine the kinetic energy of the electron. If an electron
                              moves from rest at the origin of co-ordinates of the system K along the axis
                              of X under the action of an electrostatic force X, it is clear that the energy
                              withdrawn from the electrostatic ﬁeld has the value R ǫXdx. As the electron is
                              to be slowly accelerated, and consequently may not give oﬀ any energy in the
                              form of radiation, the energy withdrawn from the electrostatic ﬁeld must be put
                              down as equal to the energy of motion W of the electron. Bearing in mind that
                              during the whole process of motion which we are considering, the ﬁrst of the
                              equations (A) applies, we therefore obtain
                                                    W = Z ǫXdx=mZ vβ3vdv
                                                                 (         0       )
                                                                2  p 1
                                                         = mc             2  2 −1 .
                                                                     1−v /c
                                  Thus, when v = c, W becomes inﬁnite. Velocities greater than that of light
                              have—as in our previous results—no possibility of existence.
                                  This expression for the kinetic energy must also, by virtue of the argument
                              stated above, apply to ponderable masses as well.
                                  We will now enumerate the properties of the motion of the electron which
                              result from the system of equations (A), and are accessible to experiment.
                                  1. From the second equation of the system (A) it follows that an electric
                              force Y and a magnetic force N have an equally strong deﬂective action on an
                              electron moving with the velocity v, when Y = Nv/c. Thus we see that it is
                              possible by our theory to determine the velocity of the electron from the ratio
                                 9The deﬁnition of force here given is not advantageous, as was ﬁrst shown by M. Planck.
                              It is more to the point to deﬁne force in such a way that the laws of momentum and energy
                              assume the simplest form.
                                                                    22
                              of the magnetic power of deﬂexion A  to the electric power of deﬂexion A , for
                                                                 m                                   e
                              any velocity, by applying the law
                                                                Am = v.
                                                                Ae    c
                                 This relationship may be tested experimentally, since the velocity of the
                              electron can be directly measured, e.g. by means of rapidly oscillating electric
                              and magnetic ﬁelds.
                                 2. From the deduction for the kinetic energy of the electron it follows that
                              between the potential diﬀerence, P, traversed and the acquired velocity v of the
                              electron there must be the relationship
                                                     Z         m 2(p 1              )
                                                P= Xdx= ǫc                  2  2 −1 .
                                                                       1−v /c
                                 3. We calculate the radius of curvature of the path of the electron when a
                              magnetic force N is present (as the only deﬂective force), acting perpendicularly
                              to the velocity of the electron. From the second of the equations (A) we obtain
                                                        d2y   v2    ǫ v r       v2
                                                      − 2 =      =      N 1− 2
                                                        dt     R    mc          c
                              or
                                                           mc2       v/c       1
                                                       R= ǫ ·p          2  2 · N.
                                                                   1−v /c
                                 These three relationships are a complete expression for the laws according
                              to which, by the theory here advanced, the electron must move.
                                 In conclusion I wish to say that in working at the problem here dealt with
                              I have had the loyal assistance of my friend and colleague M. Besso, and that I
                              am indebted to him for several valuable suggestions.
                                                                   23
                              About this Document
                    This edition of Einstein’s On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies is
                  based on the English translation of his original 1905 German-language paper
                  (published as Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter K¨orper, in Annalen der Physik.
                  17:891, 1905) which appeared in the book The Principle of Relativity, pub-
                  lished in 1923 by Methuen and Company, Ltd. of London. Most of the
                  papers in that collection are English translations from the German Das Rela-
                  tivatsprinzip, 4th ed., published by in 1922 by Tuebner. All of these sources
                  are now in the public domain; this document, derived from them, remains in
                  the public domain and may be reproduced in any manner or medium without
                  permission, restriction, attribution, or compensation.
                    Numbered footnotes are as they appeared in the 1923 edition; editor’s
                  notes are marked by a dagger (†) and appear in sans serif type. The 1923
                  English translation modiﬁed the notation used in Einstein’s 1905 paper to
                  conform to that in use by the 1920’s; for example, c denotes the speed of
                  light, as opposed the V used by Einstein in 1905.
                    This edition was prepared by John Walker. The current version of this
                  document is available in a variety of formats from the editor’s Web site:
                             http://www.fourmilab.ch/
                                  24
