                                   Story and Novel Terms 12 
                                                    
               This list of terms builds on the preceding lists you have been given at Heritage Woods in 
               grades 9-11.  It contains all the terms you were responsible for learning in the past, as 
               well as the new terms you are now responsible for learning for the exam.   
                
               o  The new terms are marked with (NT): New Term.  
               o  Government exam terms are marked with an asterisk (*). 
                
               Short Stories: General 
                                                    
               Short Story: A fictional tale of a length that is too short to publish in a single volume 
               like a novel. Short stories are usually between five and sixty pages; as a result, they can 
               be read in a single sitting. Usually, short stories concentrate on a single event with only 
               one or two characters.  
                
               The short story has three elements: plot, characterization, and setting. In addition, short 
               stories also contain other devices/features including: theme, conflict, point of view, 
               suspense, foreshadowing, flashback, deus ex machina, and in medias res.  Theme is so 
               vital to the short story, however, that some critics consider it the fourth element, rather 
               than a device or feature. 
                
               Short Story Elements 
                
                  A. Plot*: The events of the story or the series of actions that make up the story are 
                     referred to as the plot.  Basically, the plot is what happens in the story.  
                     Traditionally, it is divided into five parts. 
                   
                     1.  Introduction: The reader meets the characters and discovers the setting. 
                        Reader interest is aroused here. The conflict that drives the story’s action is 
                        discovered at the end of the introduction, with the initiating incident. 
                         
                     2.  Rising action*: Builds up the story (the longest part)— a series of steps that 
                        lead to the climax. You get more information about conflict and character 
                        here.  
                   
                     3.  Climax*: Here, the reader finds out what happens to the conflict, or how the 
                        conflict might be resolved. The story may not yet be finished, but the reader 
                        now has a good understanding of what way it is going to go. 
                   
                     4.  Falling Action*: The plot begins to wrap up in this section of the story, which 
                        is usually brief.  
                   
                   
                   
                                         5.  Dénouement/Conclusion/Resolution*: This part follows quickly after the 
                                               climax and provides the last pieces of information for the reader. 
                                               “Denouement” is French for “unknotting”; you may therefore think of 
                                               denouement as the “unknotting” or “untangling” of the plot. Other words for 
                                               denouement are conclusion or resolution (think about it as the resolution of 
                                               the climax). However, not all conclusions provide resolution. 
                                                
                                               5.A. There are four types of conclusions and they have a variety of names:  
                                    
                                               1.  Expository Happy: All loose ends are tied up and explained and the 
                                                     ending is happy. 
                                               2.  Expository Sad: All loose ends are tied up and explained and the ending 
                                                     is sad. 
                                               3.  Surprise* or Twist: Something happens that the reader does not expect at 
                                                     all. 
                                               4.  Unresolved/Indeterminate/Cliffhanger: The reader is left with questions 
                                                     and has to, in part, supply the ending him or herself. Some loose ends are 
                                                     left to dangle. 
                                                      
                                               5.B. Anti-Climax*: A dull or disappointing ending to something after 
                                               increasing excitement. For example: After the weeks of preparation, the 
                                               concert itself was a bit of an anticlimax. In connection to a story or novel, it 
                                               means an ending that doesn’t measure up to the plot events that precede it (the 
                                               ending is anti-climactic).  
                                    
                                   Plot Diagram: Also known as Freytag’s Pyramid, the story diagram or plot diagram, 
                                   was invented in 1864 by Gustav Freytag to visually represent the five plot parts and 
                                   their relationship with one another. Modern stories may or may not tidily fit Freytag’s 
                                   Pyramid.  
                                                                                                    
                                                                       
                                                                                             Climax
                                                                                                        Fallin
                                                                              Rising                    action     Conclusion/Denouement 
                                                                              action
                                                           Introduction 
                                                                                  Initiating 
                                                                                  inciden
                                                                                                                                                               
                              
                              
                     B. Characterization*: The collection of characters, or people, in a short story is 
                     called its characterization. A character*, of course, is usually a person in a story, but it 
                     can also be an animal (think about Flounder the fish in Disney’s Ariel or Simba in 
                     Disney’s The Lion King or the dogs in 8 Below). 
                      
                     Character Types  
                      
                         •   Protagonist*: The main character in the story. The protagonist is usually, but not 
                             always, a “good guy.” 
                              
                         •  Antagonist*: The force against the protagonist. The antagonist is usually another 
                             character, but not always, especially if the conflict is “person against self.” The 
                             antagonist is usually described as “the bad guy”, although that description doesn’t 
                             work if the conflict is person against self or person against environment.  
                      
                         •   Flat*: This is a minor character with one or maybe two sides to the personality. 
                             These characters might not seem very realistic or life-like because so little is 
                             known about them. 
                      
                         •  Round*: These characters are believable and complex people with several sides 
                             to their personality. They are lifelike and behave like real people would, if real 
                             people were in those same situations. 
                      
                         •   Dynamic*: Also known as a kinetic character, a dynamic character changes in 
                             some important way because of plot events. For example: a cruel old man might 
                             see the error of his ways and become generous and kind, or a gentle girl becomes 
                             vicious and angry because her parents divorce.  
                              
                         •   Static*: These characters are the opposite of dynamic characters. These people 
                             don’t change through the course of a story. They have the same personality 
                             throughout.  
                      
                         •   Stereotypical*: Also known as stock*, these characters are people who are easily 
                             recognized as “types”. It wouldn’t matter in which story they appear, they are 
                             always the same. For example, the old witch-like woman, the geeky scientist, the 
                             airhead, and the dumb jock characters are all stereotypical, or stock, characters. In 
                             this sense, they are also clichés.* (A cliché is an over-used expression, like “light 
                             as a feather,” or an over-used idea, like the stereotypical characters just 
                             discussed.) 
                              
                         •   Character Foil*: A character foil, or simply “foil”, occurs when two characters 
                             balance each other in some way; they are almost like two halves of a whole 
                             person. This is when a character is portrayed as opposite of another character in a 
                             particular way. By putting the two characters next to each other, the different 
                             characteristic is emphasized. This helps readers recognize particular 
                             characteristics. A good person might be a foil for an evil person, for example.  
                              
                         •   Caricature*: A character in a piece of literature who has very exaggerated 
                             characteristics, usually for comic effect. In a way, a caricature is an extreme form 
                             of stereotype. 
                              
                         •   Hero*: Traditionally, this was a main character who was comprised of only 
                             admirable traits: courage, idealism, bravery, strength, fortitude. Over time, 
                             however, as different trends became apparent, the various qualities of the hero 
                             also changed. For example, the Romantic age (early 1800s) prized individualism 
                             and inspired creativity. (NT) 
                              
                         •   Anti-hero: By modern times, the idea of an anti-hero had emerged: a main 
                             character having none of the traits of a traditional hero, and therefore having a lot 
                             of qualities that make him/her easy to dislike. This person might be whiny, weak, 
                             immoral, or cowardly, for example. (NT) 
                      
                      
                     Character Analysis:  The author may choose any of six ways to reveal a character to the 
                     reader.  The reader must therefore be prepared to watch for "clues" about each character 
                     in these same six ways: 
                      
                             1. physical appearance 
                             2. things the character says 
                             3. things the character does (actions) 
                             4. things the character thinks 
                             5. things other characters say about the character 
                             6. author information  
                      
                     Character Sketch: A character sketch is a description of a character's moral and 
                     personality qualities, written in paragraph form with specific examples from the story in 
                     question. Usually, the character terms (see above) are used in the course of the 
                     description. Physical appearance and dress (if showing something about personality) are 
                     sometimes described as well. 
                      
                     C. Setting*: The author may choose to state the setting clearly or leave it to the reader 
                     to infer from textual clues (such as weather). There are two parts to a complete setting: 
                     emotional and physical. The mood* (or atmosphere*) of a story is the emotional setting, 
                     so readers need to concentrate on words that evoke feeling and emotion. The time, place, 
                     and season comprise the physical setting, so readers need to concentrate on words that 
                     describe physical details.  
                       
                      
                      
                      
                     Short Story Devices and Features 
                      
                         A.  Theme*: The message of the story, stated in one or two complete sentences. 
                              When a person describes a story’s theme, the person is describing what can be 
                              learned about life and/or people from the story. Theme is so important, it is often 
                              described as the fourth element of the short story. Sometimes theme is confused 
                              with “the moral” of the story. 
                               
                               
                         B.  Conflict*: Conflict drives the plot forward. The reader discovers the conflict by 
                              the end of the introduction with the initiating incident, which is an event that 
                              demonstrates the conflict to the reader and begins the rising action. Either internal 
                              or external conflict can be the main conflict of a story and therefore the primary 
                              driver of the plot: 
                              •  Internal Conflict*: When the conflict is inside a character in a short story/ 
                                  novel as an internal struggle. Usually characters, like real people, have 
                                  conflicting fears and goals that cause them to behave in certain ways. These 
                                  secret conflicts (secret from the other characters in the text) represent the 
                                  character’s internal conflict. The reader, of course, is aware of the internal 
                                  conflict because he/she can see the character’s thoughts.  
                              •   External Conflict*: When the conflict is outside a character in a short story/ 
                                  novel. External conflict is the opposite of internal conflict, in that the conflict 
                                  is obvious to all the other characters in the story, as well as the reader. 
                                  External conflict is best described as the adversities faced by the character 
                                  during the plot.  
                               
                              Additionally, there are four different categories of conflict: 
                              •   Person versus person 
                              •   Person versus self 
                              •   Person versus environment 
                              •   Person versus the supernatural/machine 
                      
                         C. Point of View*: The writer selects the point of view from which to tell the story 
                         that best suits his/her intentions as a writer 
                         •    First Person*: “I” is the central character and tells his or her own story.  
                         •    Second Person: The story is told about “you”; for example, “You could see the 
                              anger in her eyes.” 
                         •  Third Person* where the point of view can be one of: 
                                  o  Omniscient*: Characters are referred to as “he” and “she”, and the reader 
                                      knows what is going on in their heads. All characters’ thoughts are made 
                                      clear in the text.  
                                  o  Limited Omniscient*: Characters are referred to as “he” and “she”, and 
                                      the reader knows what is going on in some of their heads. The remaining 
                                      characters are treated in the objective fashion.  
                               
             o  Objective*: The story is about “he” or “she”, and the author records 
              action objectively, as a movie camera would. The reader does not see any 
              of the character’s thoughts (doesn’t get inside their heads).  
         
          D. Deus ex Machina: From the Latin "god out of the machine."  This device refers to   
          any artificial device that is not a natural extension of the plot that allows for an easy–
          and unbelievable—resolution of conflict.  Deus ex machina is an improbable plot 
          event.  
         
          E. In Medias Res: Beginning in the middle of the action. A sample beginning to such 
          a story: “I saw the punch coming but couldn't duck in time.  I collapsed to the floor, 
          nose gushing red, clotted blood.”  
         
          F. Flashback*: When a character thinks back to an event that occurred before the 
          story began. Sometimes flashbacks are written as separate “interrupter” sections 
          within a novel. Flashbacks are also used in short stories.  
         
          G. Foreshadowing*: A hint of events to come. Also used extensively in both novels 
          and short stories.  
          H. Suspense*: Anxiety or apprehension resulting from an uncertain, undecided, or 
          mysterious situation. Suspense is when the writer creates excited anticipation of an 
          approaching climax in the reader.  
          I. Dilemma*: A dilemma is something a character faces that puts him or her in the 
          position of decision-maker. Unfortunately, the nature of a dilemma is such that, given 
          two choices, neither is ideal and both have some unattractive qualities. For example, 
          an exhausted character might face choosing between getting enough sleep and getting 
          a bad mark on the essay he is working on, or further sleep deprivation with more time 
          spent on the paper. (NT) 
         
        Novels 
         
        Many of the terms associated with short stories are also used in novels, particularly 
        setting, characterization, plot, and theme. The difference between a novel and a short 
        story is in the length and complexity of the narrative. Novels are longer and more 
        complex than short stories; therefore, they take several sittings to read in their entirety. 
         
        Novels, like short stories, can be written in different style categories or sub-genres. The 
        different sub-genres include mystery*, science fiction, fantasy*, romance, history, and 
        contemporary, to name a few.  
         
        Style*: Writers use many, many different techniques to attract reader interest and 
        attention or to accomplish their literary purpose in short stories, novels, poems and plays. 
        Several such stylistic techniques* follow here: 
                      
                         •   Antithesis*: The use of contrast, or opposition, for effect. In creative writing, 
                             antithesis is a rhetorical device where a sentence or two contains a balanced 
                             contrast of ideas, so either the two halves of a single sentence, or the two 
                             sentences placed side-by-side, show complete contrast for powerful effect. For 
                             example, “Give me liberty ,or give me death!”  
                              
                         •   Chronological Order*: Writers often choose to describe plot events in 
                             chronological order, meaning the events happen one after another and are not told 
                             in a mixed-up way. With a chronological approach, first things first, second things 
                             second, and so on… 
                              
                         •   Dialect*: The style of speaking used by a particular character. A dialect is 
                             influenced by where a person is from, the way he or she pronounces words, and 
                             the history of the language in the area. To many people, a dialect is like having an 
                             accent. For example, there are many different English dialects in the United 
                             Kingdom: Scottish, Irish, Welsh, and English all speak in different ways. Writers 
                             will use different dialects when creating different characters.  
                              
                         •   Diction*: An author’s choice and arrangement of words in a literary work. 
                             Diction varies according to the ends a writer wishes to achieve as well as to the 
                             nature of the literary form, the subject, and the style of the day. The ornate style 
                             of much eighteenth-century prose, therefore, was considered elegant in its time 
                             but would be deemed wordy in a contemporary essay.  
                              
                         •   Direct Presentation*: Writers who provide information directly to their readers 
                             are using direct presentation. Readers can locate specific information about a 
                             character, for example, by finding it right in the text.  
                      
                         •   Epiphany*: The sudden realization, by a character, of something very critical. An 
                             epiphany is a life-changing moment, where new knowledge is suddenly gained.  
                              
                         •   Indirect Presentation*: Writers often choose indirect presentation in order to 
                             inform their readers about their characters or other story elements. Indirect 
                             presentation of information requires readers to use their inference skills, as the 
                             specific information is shown rather than told to the reader.  
                      
                         •   Irony*: There are three different kinds of irony.  
                                 o  Verbal irony occurs when the opposite of what is said is actually meant 
                                     (sarcasm is an extreme form of verbal irony).  
                                 o  Situational irony occurs when an event occurs that is the opposite of what 
                                     was expected by the character and/or reader.  
                                 o  Dramatic irony* is when a character says something, but the 
                                     audience/reader knows more than the character does about other 
                                     characters or events, so the statement comes across with a double meaning 
                                     that the audience/reader “gets” and the character doesn’t.  
                                      
                         •   Narration*: Something that is narrated—an account, a story, a novel–is a 
                             narration. Actually telling the story via the process of narrating is also narration, 
                             so “narration” is a verb as well as a noun.  
                              
                         •   Narrator*: The teller of the story or the person speaking in the story.  
                              
                         •   Paradox*:  A statement, person, or situation that seems to be contradictory or 
                             opposed to common sense; it is an unusual pairing of non-matching (incongruous) 
                             ideas. Authors use paradox to provoke insight, so while a paradoxical statement 
                             appears to contradict itself, it often, on closer examination, reveals a truth. In 
                             Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, for example, Juliet paradoxically refers to Rome 
                             as her “only love, sprung from [her] only hate.” “The child is the father of the 
                             man” (William Wordsworth) is also a paradoxical statement. 
                              
                         •  Satire*: A style of writing that has the goal of mocking or scorning an individual, 
                             an institution, or society as a whole. Angry and bitter satire is called Juvenalian 
                             satire while gentle mockery is called Horatian satire.  
                              
                         •   Sarcasm*: When a character (or person) uses verbal irony to express bitter or 
                             angry feelings about something. The reverse of what is meant is said. For 
                             example, a person might say, “That’s an act of genius!” when he really means it is 
                             the act of a fool.  
                              
                         •   Stream-of-consciousness*: This is a manner, or style, of writing in which a 
                             character’s thoughts or perceptions are presented in random form, without regard 
                             for logical sequence and conventional word order. The idea behind this style is to 
                             duplicate the way people really think: the thoughts and feelings and associations 
                             come out as they occur in a continuous stream. Writers may use such devices as 
                             characters speaking to themselves, using free association or lists of words. Allan 
                             Ginsberg wrote stream of consciousness poetry and Virginia Woolf wrote stream 
                             of consciousness novels. (NT) 
                      
                         •   Symbol*: A symbol has two levels of meaning: a literal level and a figurative 
                             level. Objects, characters, events and settings can all be symbolic in that they 
                             represent something else beyond themselves. E.g. the dove is literally a bird, but it 
                             has become a universal symbol of peace. The collection of symbols in a novel or 
                             short story is called symbolism*.  
                                 o  Universal symbol: A symbol recognized by many peoples—e.g. light 
                                     represents knowledge; a skull represents death. (NT) 
                                 o  Personal symbol: A symbol recognized by an individual, or a family. An 
                                     item belonging to a person might become a symbol for that particular 
                                     person, though no one outside the family/close friends makes that 
                                     association. (NT) 
                                  o  Cultural symbol: A symbol recognized by a particular culture.  E.g. the 
                                       colour black is symbolic of death or mourning in most western cultures, 
                                       but in some eastern cultures, mourners wear white clothes. (NT) 
                       
                      Other Forms of Fiction 
                       
                          •   Allegory*: A story that has a deeper or more general meaning in addition to its 
                              surface meaning. Allegories are composed of several symbols or metaphors. For 
                              example, in William Golding’s Lord of the Flies, the boys on the island end up 
                              ruining the island. The story of this destruction is a symbol of how people are 
                              inherently evil – they will destroy their environment just as Adam and Eve 
                              destroyed their chances of living in Paradise (the island is a tropical Paradise). 
                              Similarly, when the conch is broken, it symbolizes the destruction of democracy 
                              and the increasing emergence of evil on the island.   
                          •   Legend*: A story, sometimes of a national or folk hero, which has a basis in fact, 
                              but which also includes imaginative material. The story of Paul Bunyan is 
                              regarded as legend, for it is believed that there was an extraordinary lumberjack 
                              who served as the model. The King Arthur stories are another example of legend 
                              because it is believed there was a real king who, along with his knights, was the 
                              source of the stories, even though the stories themselves are clearly fictional.  
                       
                          •  Myth*: An anonymous tale of unknown origins, a myth was usually created to 
                              explain a natural phenomenon, such as lightning or the cycles of the moon. Myths 
                              also explained the origin of the world or the people and animals on it, as well as 
                              the feats of gods and goddesses.  
                               
                          •   Fable*: A brief narrative, in either prose or verse, which illustrates some moral 
                              truth. The characters are often animals but not always. Think about Aesop’s 
                              Fables, such as the one about the fox and the grapes or the tortoise and the hare. 
                              The moral truth illustrated by the fable is sometimes something in its own right: a 
                              proverb.  
                               
                          •   Proverb*: A short popular saying, similar to an epigram (see poetry handout), 
                              which is generally an observation or a piece of advice. Proverbs may be attributed 
                              to an individual, but most are anonymous products of folklore, such as “a fool and 
                              his money are soon parted.”  
                               
                          •   Folk Tale: A traditional story handed down in either oral or written form. This 
                              term covers a variety of forms of material, from primitive myths to fairy tales.  
                               
                          •   Graphic Text*: This is a new genre that marries the traditional novel and the 
                              comic book. The end result is a book of some length that has visual images as 
                              well as text, which is usually spoken by the characters in speech balloons. The 
                              graphic text is like a novel in that it is separated into chapters—it has layers of 
                              meaning that require deconstruction by the reader. These layers may have to do 
           with characterization, theme, satire, metaphor, symbolism, etc., just as in a regular 
           novel. In addition, dramatic irony can be achieved through the use of contrast 
           between the images and the words, so the graphic text genre blends elements of 
           the dramatic and visual genres as well. (NT) 
         
         
         
