                                                                                                                               
             
            Diet advice and bowel 
            preparation for your 
            colonoscopy 
             
            The aim of this information sheet is to help answer some of the questions you may have 
            about how to prepare for your colonoscopy investigation. 
             
            Please read this leaflet thoroughly at least four days before your appointment due to 
            medications that need to be stopped. If after reading, you have any further questions or 
            concerns, please do not hesitate to speak to a doctor or nurse caring for you. 
             
            What is a colonoscopy? 
            This is where a soft, flexible tube with a camera at the end is passed through your back 
            passage (anus) and up inside your bowel by a specially trained doctor or nurse. You should 
            have received the leaflet, Having a colonoscopy, which explains the procedure in more 
            detail. If you have not received a copy of this, please ask us for one. 
             
            Why do I need to prepare for this procedure? 
            Your bowel needs to be empty for the colonoscopy, so that the doctor or specialist nurse can 
            see the lining of your bowel. To achieve this you will need to alter your diet and take specific 
            preparations for a few days before the procedure. These changes are explained in this leaflet.    
             
              Please tell the nursing staff as soon as possible on the number at the end of the leaflet if 
              you 
                •   are taking any medicines to thin the blood or to prevent blood from clotting 
                    (anticoagulants or antiplatelets, such as warfarin, rivaroxaban or clopidogrel). You do 
                    not need to call if you only take aspirin 
                •   have diabetes and are on insulin 
                •   have any allergies to any medicines.  
                •   you are allergic to latex 
                 
              Please let us know if you are taking any regular medicines at your pre-assessment 
              appointment (including anything you buy yourself over the counter or any herbal or 
              homeopathic medicines).  
               
              If any of the above applies to you, you may need special instructions. 
               
              If your health has deteriorated since seeing the doctor or specialist nurse in clinic please 
              call the endoscopy nurses for advice on 020 7188 7188 ask for extension 54059 (St 
              Thomas’ Hospital) or 020 71887188 extension 53499 (Guy’s Hospital).                                              
            1 of 9                                                                                                                  
           
          We have a health questionnaire that we ask you to complete which will help to speed up your 
          appointments and pre-assessment. This can be filled in on the day of your appointment. There 
          is an electronic copy which can be emailed in advance on our Endoscopy web page via the 
          trust website www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/our-services/gastroenterology-and-
          hepatology/overview.aspx 
           
          How can I prepare for a colonoscopy? 
           
          The remainder of this leaflet advises you on how to prepare in the days leading up to 
          your colonoscopy. Please follow the actions on the days mentioned. Your appointment 
          can be on any working day, but if your appointment is on a Tuesday, “4 days before your 
          colonoscopy” would be the previous Friday.  
           
            Date                                                                          
             
                    4 days before  3 days before  2 days before  1 day before            Day of colonoscopy 
           
          Preparation: Four days before your colonoscopy 
            •   Eat and drink as normal. 
            •   Stop taking any medicines that contain iron* as the active ingredient (these will have iron, 
                ferrous, ferric or feredetate in the name of the medicine).  
            •   Continue to take all other medicines as usual. 
           
          Preparation: Three days before your colonoscopy 
            •   Eat and drink as normal. 
            •   Stop taking any medicines, including over the counter medicine that contain codeine 
                phosphate*.  
            •   Stop taking any medicines that contain loperamide*.   
            •   Continue to take all other medicines as usual. 
          *A list of what your medicines contain should be featured on the patient information leaflet 
          contained within the box. If you are unsure about whether your medicines contain iron, codeine 
          phosphate or loperamide, please ask your pharmacist, doctor or nurse caring for you. Or call 
          the Pharmacy Medicines Helpline on 020 7188 8748 (open 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday) 
          Preparation: Two days before your colonoscopy 
            •   Drink plenty of fluids, aim for two litres (about eight to ten glasses) per day. Please see 
                guide on the next page.  
            •   Start restricted eating having small meals from the guide as this will help the bowel 
                preparation medicine work properly. 
            •   Do not eat foods containing fibre. 
           
          2 of 9 
                              
                             Please see below for a guide on what to eat and what to avoid: 
                                                   You can eat/drink:                                                                                                                                                         Don’t eat/drink: 
                                           Well cooked, lean beef, lamb, ham, veal or pork                                                                                                                          Fruit, including fresh, dried 
                                           Fish, shellfish or poultry                                                                                                                                                        and canned 
                                           White rice, noodles or white pasta                                                                                                                                       Brown rice , brown pasta 
                                           Cereal including cornflakes and crisped rice                                                                                                                             Hi-fibre breakfast cereals 
                                                   cereal, Not Bran                                                                                                                                                           (including porridge oats) 
                                           White bread or toast                                                                                                                                                     Pulses or lentils 
                                           Rich Tea or other plain biscuits                                                                                                                                         Hi-fibre, multi-seeded, 
                                           Eggs, especially boiled or poached                                                                                                                                                50/50 or wholemeal bread 
                                           Butter/margarine/cheese                                                                                                                                                  Vegetables  
                                           Milk, cream, cottage cheese                                                                                                                                              Nuts/seeds  
                                           Potatoes without the skins; boiled, creamed,                                                                                                                             Roasted, deep fried 
                                                   mashed or baked                                                                                                                                                            (chips) 
                                           Soya and tofu                                                                                                                                                            Jam 
                                           Gravy made from stock cubes (plain or cornflour                                                                                                                          Crisps 
                                                   can be used to thicken)                                                                                                                                           Alcohol 
                                           Sugar or sweetener                                                                                                                                                       Red jelly 
                                           Clear jelly                                                                                                                                                              Red cordial, or fruit juice 
                                           Water, cordial, fizzy drinks, clear strained soup or 
                                                   clear stock 
                              
                             Preparation: The day before your colonoscopy  
                             Eating and drinking 
                                  •         Take your regular morning medicines unless you have been instructed otherwise. 
                                  •         Have a light breakfast, such as boiled egg on toast (white bread), no later than 9am. 
                                  •         After breakfast do not eat any solid food until after your examination.   
                                  •         Drink clear fluids only today. This may include water, squash, fizzy drinks, clear strained 
                                            soup or clear stock. Aim for two litres (about eight to ten glasses) in total throughout 
                                            the day not including the bowel preparation. 
                                  •         You can drink tea or coffee with small splash of milk.    
                                  •         It is best to avoid alcoholic drinks. 
                              
                             Medicines and laxatives 
                                  •         Stop taking any bulk-forming laxatives now. These include:  
                                          •         Isphaghula (e.g. Fybogel®)                                                                                         •  Methylcellulose (as in Celevac®) 
                                          •         Bran                                                                                                               •  Sterculia (as in Normacol®) 
                              
                             Where possible, try to take your usual morning medicines before 10am, and your evening 
                             medicines after 9pm. Medicines taken between these times may not be fully absorbed 
                             because of the bowel preparation solutions you will be taking (see next page). If you need any 
                             advice on when to take your medicines, please contact the Pharmacy Medicines Helpline on 
                             020 7188 8748 (open 9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday).  
                              
                             3 of 9 
             
            Preparation: On the day of your colonoscopy 
             •   Stop taking any laxatives and continue to avoid any medicines containing iron, 
                 loperamide, or codeine. 
             •   You should continue to take all of your medications as normal, unless you have been 
                 told otherwise by the doctor or endoscopy nurse.  
             •   Drink plenty of clear fluid – you can drink up to three hours before your examination.   
             •   Leave valuables at home – do not bring them with you to the Endoscopy Department. 
             •   You may want to bring a dressing gown, slippers and something to read. 
             
            Bowel preparation solutions 
            In preparation for your colonoscopy we will provide you with bowel preparation solutions 
            (strong laxative sachets; some patients will be given senna tablets as well).  
             
            There are various brands of the bowel preparation solutions: We will tick the box 
            against the preparation that you have been prescribed 
             
            Our standard preparation called CitraFleet® or Picolax® (sodium picosulphate),   
            Klean-Prep®   
            Moviprep®. 
             
            Why might I be given Klean-Prep® or Moviprep®? 
            If the doctors are concerned about your kidneys or if you have kidney disease they will 
            prescribe you Klean-Prep® or Moviprep®. These preparations are less likely to affect your 
            kidney function than our standard preparation (Picolax® or CitraFleet®). You may be required 
            to have a blood test before and after the procedure to check your kidney function.  
            Please let us know if: 
              •   You are unable to drink a large volume of fluid. 
              •   You are restricted on the volume of fluid you are allowed to drink daily. 
              •   You have been told by a doctor that your kidneys are not working properly.  
             
            How should I take the bowel preparation? 
            Please follow the instructions and time schedules in this leaflet and not the instructions on 
            the packet.  
             
            Please note that the instructions are different depending on which bowel preparation your 
            doctor has prescribed you – please make sure you read the correct section in this leaflet. The 
            times that you need to take your medicine will also depend on whether you are having your 
            colonoscopy in the morning or afternoon. 
             
             
            4 of 9 
        
       If you are prescribed Sodium Picosulphate (Picolax® or 
       CitraFleet®) sachets and senna tablets  
         
                                                                       
       The solution tastes better if served chilled, so you may wish to mix in advance and keep in 
       the fridge.  Use within 24 hours of preparation. 
          
         On the day before the procedure: 
         4pm                 Take four senna tablets from the pack provided with a glass 
                             of water. 
         5pm                 Mix one sachet of sodium picosulphate with approximately 
                             150ml of water. Do this in a large glass or jug, as the 
                             mixture may fizz over. Stir the solution for two to three 
                             minutes. If the solution becomes warm, allow it to cool 
                             before you drink it. You may add more water if you wish to 
                             dilute it. Please drink the preparation at once; or if drinking 
                             slowly finish within an hour. 
         On the morning of the procedure: 
         6am for a morning   Take the second sachet of sodium picosulphate, preparing it 
         appointment or      in the same way as before. 
         10am for an afternoon 
         appointment  
        
       5 of 9 
           
          If you are prescribed Klean-Prep®  
                 
              
              
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
          The solution tastes better if served chilled, so you may wish to mix in advance and keep in 
          the fridge. Use within 24 hours of preparation.  
           
             On the day before the procedure: 
                                                                                              ®
             2pm                            Empty the contents of one sachet of Klean-Prep  into one 
                                            litre of water and stir until dissolved. Drink this over the 
                                            course of an hour / an hour and a half.     ®
             4pm                            Dissolve the second sachet of Klean-Prep  and drink as 
                                            above.  
                                                                                     ®
             6pm                            Dissolve the third sachet of Klean-Prep  and drink as 
                                            above.  
             On the morning of the procedure: 
                                                                                      ®
             6am for a morning              Dissolve the fourth sachet of Klean-Prep  and drink as 
             appointment or                 above.  
             10am for an afternoon 
             appointment 
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
          6 of 9 
          
         If you are prescribed Moviprep®  
            
            
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
         The solution tastes better if served chilled, so you may wish to mix in advance and keep in 
         the fridge. Use within 24 hours of preparation. 
          
           On the day before the procedure: 
                                                                                    ®
           4pm                         Empty one sachet A and one sachet B of Moviprep  into 
                                       one litre of water and stir until dissolved. Drink this over 
                                       the course of an hour / an hour and a half. 
           On the morning of the procedure: 
                                                                                ®
           6am for a morning           Dissolve the second sachet of A & B Moviprep  as 
           appointment or              above and drink over an hour/ an hour and a half. 
           10am for an afternoon 
           appointment  
          
          
         Will I have to stay near a toilet once I have started taking the 
         bowel preparation? 
         It is advisable that you stay near a toilet once you have started taking the bowel preparation 
         solution. You should expect frequent bowel movements and diarrhoea, starting within three 
         hours of the first dose and continuing until after your last dose. Please note: The timings of 
         the bowel preparation medication are designed so that the effects wear off before you 
         are due to leave home and travel to the hospital.  
          
         Will I have any side effects? 
         You may have some bloating or stomach cramps – this is normal.  
          
         You can use a barrier cream, such as zinc and castor oil on your bottom to prevent soreness 
         during your frequent trips to the toilet.  
          
         Remember to keep drinking clear fluids to stop you from becoming dehydrated. As a guide, 
         try to drink about one glass every hour. Signs that you are dehydrated include dizziness, 
         headache and confusion. 
          
         7 of 9 
             
            Please report any allergic reactions to the preparation such as rash, itchiness, or redness to 
            the endoscopy unit or your GP. In very rare cases you may have a reaction that causes 
            swelling of the face, lips, tongue or throat. If this happens seek medical help as soon as 
            possible.    
             
            If you vomit at any stage after taking the bowel preparation solution, or if you have any 
            concerns regarding this preparation, please telephone the endoscopy unit on 020 7188 3221 
            (St Thomas’ Hospital) or 020 7188 1728 (Guy’s Hospital).  
             
            Other information  
            If you are taking the contraceptive pill it may not be effective once you have taken the bowel 
            preparation, so you must use other precautions (such as condoms) to avoid pregnancy. 
            Please speak to your GP, pharmacist or family planning clinic for further advice on 
            contraception. 
             
            Further information on senna tablets 
             
            What are senna tablets?  
            Senna is a natural effective laxative for the relief of occasional constipation.  
             
            For safe use: 
                •   Keep out of reach and sight of children. 
                •   Store in the original container. 
                •   Check the foil is not broken before use. If it is, do not take that tablet. 
                •   Do not take if you know you are allergic to any of the ingredients. 
             
            Consult your doctor or pharmacist if 
                •   you have sharp or persistent stomach pain  
                •   your abdomen is tender to the touch or hurts when you move  
                •   you accidentally take too much senna  
                •   you have been told by your doctor that you have an intolerance to some sugars.  
             
            Do not store above 25ºC. Do not freeze. Do not use after the expiry date. 
             
            Possible side effects: 
            You may experience temporary mild stomach pains. If this gets serious or if you experience 
            other symptoms after taking this product, tell your doctor or pharmacist. 
             
            The leaflet inside the box gives some more information about senna tablets  
             
            Other questions 
            Please see our Gastroenterology and Hepatology web page regarding other Endoscopy 
            frequently asked questions and answers. www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/our -
            services/gastroenterology -and-hepatology/overview.aspx  
             
            Please make sure you follow the instructions in this leaflet carefully. If you do not, your bowel 
            may not be clear and your examination may have to be repeated. If you have any questions, 
            please call the endoscopy unit on 020 7188 7188 Nurse and ask for extension 54059 (at St 
            Thomas’ Hospital) or 020 7188 1728 (at Guy’s Hospital). 
             
            8 of 9 
           
            Contact us 
            If you need to change or cancel your appointment please ring 020 7188 8887. 
             
            If you have any questions about preparing your bowel for colonoscopy, please contact one 
            of the pre-assessment nurses on 020 7188 7188 ask for extension 54052 (9am to 5pm, 
            Monday to Friday). 
             
            If you have any other questions, problems or concerns about the colonoscopy procedure 
            please contact the endoscopy unit staff for advice (Monday-Saturday 9am-5pm): 
                                                                                                               
            t: 020 7188 7188 ask for extension 54059 for Nurse in charge  
            t: 020 7188 7188 ask for extension: 54046 St Thomas Reception desk 
            t: 020 7188 1728 Guy’s Hospital 
             
            In case of emergency: Out of hours (6pm until 8am the next day and on Saturdays and 
            Sundays: t: 020 7188 7188 and ask to be put through to the On-call gastroenterology 
            registrar (via Rota watch). 
             
            For more information leaflets on conditions, procedures, treatments and services offered at 
            our hospitals, please visit www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/leaflets 
          Pharmacy Medicines Helpline 
          If you have any questions or concerns about your medicines, please speak to the staff caring 
          for you or call our Medicines Helpline. t: 020 7188 8748, Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm 
           
          Your comments and concerns 
          For advice, support or to raise a concern, contact our Patient Advice and Liaison Service 
          (PALS). To make a complaint, contact the complaints department. 
          t: 020 7188 8801 (PALS)             e: pals@gstt.nhs.uk 
          t: 020 7188 3514 (complaints)       e: complaints2@gstt.nhs.uk 
           
          Language and accessible support services  
          If you need an interpreter or information about your care in a different language or format, 
          please get in touch.    020 7188 8815         languagesupport@gstt.nhs.uk 
                               t:                    e:
           
          NHS 111 
          Offers medical help and advice from fully trained advisers supported by experienced nurses 
          and paramedics. Available over the phone 24 hours a day. t: 111 
           
          NHS Choices  
          Provides online information and guidance on all aspects of health and healthcare, to help you 
          make choices about your health. w: www.nhs.uk 
           
           Was this leaflet useful? 
           We want to make sure the information you receive is helpful to you. If you have any 
           comments about this leaflet, we would be happy to hear from you, fill in our simple online 
           form, w: www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk/leaflets, or e: patientinformationteam@gstt.nhs.uk 
            
                                                                                      Leaflet number: 3993/VER2 
                                                                                    Date published: February 2019 
                                                                                      Review date: February 2022 
                                                                   © 2019 Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust 
                                                                              A list of sources is available on request 
                                                                                                             
            Our values: Put patients first  |  Take pride in what we do  |  Respect others  |  Strive to be the best  |  Act with integrity 
             
          9 of 9 
