      Remarks to the Invoice $%&EX_L1700011
      General Notes
      Currencies are always specified in EUR. The explanation for the product codes can be found in the document “SMSS XML REPORT SPECIFICATION” available at the ECC
      website.
      The Settlement Amount Commodity and the corresponding Luxembourgian VAT Commodity / Foreign VAT Commodity, if applicable, have already been settled via your
      Clearing Member(s) or Settlement Bank. Trading Participants (hereafter “TP”) are either purchasing or supplying services/ commodity to/from ECC Lux. In the same month,
      a TP can buy and sell from/to ECC Lux.
      The different lines 'Purchases' and 'Sales' on page one of this invoice summarize and refer to the subsequent pages where a more detailed description of the transactions is
      given. The details show, where applicable, under sec 1 'Settlement of Spot Transactions', under sec 2 'Settlement of Intra-day Transactions' and under sec 3 'Settlement of
      Futures Expiries'. Within each section, there are subsections for 'Purchases' (where this should be understood as purchases for the TP and sales for ECC Lux) and 'Sales'
      (where this should be understood as sales by the TP and purchases by ECC Lux). Within sec 1 and 2, there is a distinction between Transactions at so called 'Positive
      Prices' and 'Negative Prices', the latter only applicable to the commodity power. Within sec 3, the purchases and sales are at positive prices.
      Therefore the following 2 transactions are possible in relation to positive pricing:
        sales positive prices: supply of commodity by TP to ECC Lux (self-bill invoice by ECC Lux)
       •
       • purchase positive prices: supply of commodity by ECC Lux to TP (invoice by ECC Lux)
      The purchase/sale of power at negative price is considered as a “supply of other services“ under German and Luxembourg legislation. A sale of power at a negative price,
      i.e. supplier selling power to ECC Lux, is thus regarded as a supply of service by ECC Lux to supplier, and a purchase at a negative price, i.e. TP purchases power from
      ECC Lux, as a supply of service by the TP to ECC Lux.
      Therefore the following 2 transactions are possible in relation to negative pricing:
       • sales negative prices: supply of service by ECC Lux (invoice by ECC Lux)
       • purchase negative prices: supply of service by TP (self-bill invoice by ECC Lux)
      Whenever a negative amount is stated in the field 'Commodity', the respective row of the document is to be regarded as a self-bill-invoice, i.e. ECC Lux (sender) is the
      recipient of the supplied services/ commodity whereas the addressee is to be regarded as supplier of the respective services. Whenever a positive amount is stated in the
      field 'Commodity', the respective row of the document is to be regarded as an invoice, i.e. the TP (addressee) is the recipient of the supplied services/ commodity whereas
      ECC Lux is to be regarded as supplier of the respective services. Thus, within the combined Invoice / Self-Bill Invoice the purchases at positive prices and sales at negative
      prices are subject to invoicing by ECC Lux, and the sales at positive prices and purchases at negative prices are subject to self-bill invoicing by ECC Lux.
      Clearing Fees and the corresponding VAT, if applicable, will be debited on due date via your Clearing-Member(s) or Settlement Bank as specified in the respective current
      ECC price list. Where applicable, foreign VAT refers to the VAT of the country of the invoice recipient as shown in the address field. The value-added tax and the fees are
      calculated on the basis of the individual trades. This can result in rounding differences in invoicing.
      Should the recipient of a self-bill-invoice disagree with the content, the trading participant must return to ECC Lux either by e-mail or by mail to the address mentioned on the
      invoice and indicate the reason of the disagreement. In case the trading participant does not dispute the invoice by following the above-mentioned procedure within 10
      business days upon receipt of the invoice, the invoice will be considered as accepted. An agreement shall be settled as soon as possible after the notification by the trading
      participant of the disputed self-bill-invoice. When an agreement is reached, ECC Lux will cancel the disputed self-bill-invoice and issue a new one in an adequate period of
      time. The new / rectified self-bill-invoice shall be issued in accordance with the self-bill-invoice contents and procedures stated above.
      Information regarding the Settlement of Spot and Intraday Transactions as well as regarding the Physical Delivery of expired Derivatives
      Market Positions
      Items on the invoice refer to deliveries executed during the current invoice month (delivery month).
      In as far as your company has been qualified by ECC as non-resident for VAT purposes in Luxembourg on the basis of the VAT questionnaire which you have filled in, the
      notes herein below are applicable to you. Please inform us of any change in the circumstances outlined to European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l. in the
      framework of the qualification since such could lead to a change in your status and, hence, in the sales VAT treatment of the trades.
      Deliveries/ services by European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l. for trading participants qualified as non-resident for VAT purposes in Luxembourg are not subject
      to Luxembourg VAT (Art. 38 of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC for supplies of power and gas / Art. 44 of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC for supplies of emission rights
      and capacity certificates in the French capacity market). In the event of our deliveries/ services being subject to VAT in your country, you might be a VAT debtor with regard
      to the VAT and, as a result, you might be obliged to pay such over to the fiscal authorities (Reverse Charge).
      Supplies of power, gas and capacity certificates from a taxable person (Art. 9 of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC) to European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l
      are subject to VAT in Luxembourg (Art. 38 or 44 of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC). Luxembourg VAT is not shown for deliveries / services by trading participants
      qualified as non-resident for VAT purposes for European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l. since VAT debtorship for the deliveries provided to us is transferred to
      European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l.as the recipient of the services according to art. 195 (power and gas deliveries) and art. 196 (transfer of capacity
      certificates, emission rights) of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC.
      Luxembourg VAT is shown for transfers of capacity certificates between trading participants qualified as taxable person and as resident in Luxembourg for VAT purposes
      and European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l.
      Luxembourg VAT is not shown for deliveries / services of emission rights by trading participants qualified as taxable person and as resident in Luxembourg for VAT purposes
      for ECC Lux, Reverse charge mechanism is applicable.
      Supplies / Services of emission rights by a non-taxable person, e.g. public body in exercise of public authority, for ECC Lux are not subject to VAT in Luxembourg.
      ECC will waive their fees for one leg of a spread transaction. Those discounts will be disclosed separately with own product groups. The discount on single trade basis can
      be retraced via the ECC Member Area.
      Clearing fees reductions may result from current incentive and discount programs.
      Invoice Number: $%&EX_L1700011                 Explanations 1/2                    Invoice Date:2017-06-30
      Remarks to the Invoice $%&EX_L1700011
      Notes regarding the Settlement of Spot Market and Intraday Transactions with a Negative Purchase Price
      The Sale of power at a negative purchase price is considered as a “supply of other services“ under Luxembourg legislation. In as far as your company has been qualified by
      ECC as non-resident for VAT purposes in Luxembourg on the basis of the VAT questionnaire which you have filled in, the notes herein below are applicable to you.
      According to art. 44 of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC the sale of power at a negative purchase price (supply of service rendered by ECC Lux ) is not subject to
      Luxembourg VAT. Should the supply be subject to VAT in your country you might be liable to pay the VAT to the tax authorities (Reverse Charge).
      Luxembourg VAT is not shown for the purchase of power at a negative purchase price (supply of service rendered to ECC Lux) by trading participants qualified as non-
      resident for VAT purposes for European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l. since VAT debtorship for the deliveries provided to us is transferred to ECC Lux as the
      recipient of the services according to art. 44 and art. 196 of the Council Directive 2006/112/EC.
      Notes regarding the Settlement of Spot Market and Intraday Transactions in the Serbian Market area
      In the Serbian Market area all sales / purchases of electricity from and to European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg S.à.r.l are carried out with the Serbian Taxpayer
      identification number (TIN) 109349732.
      European Commodity Clearing Luxembourg has appointed a fiscal representative:
      PricewaterhouseCoopers Consulting d.o.o.
      Omladinskih brigada 88a, 11070 Belgrade, Serbia
      TIN: 103914680
      Place of issuance of invoice: Belgrade
      According to the Serbian VAT Law Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 4 the place of supply of electricity for which delivery is carried out through transmission or distribution
      network is the place where the recipient has seat or permanent establishment for electricity purchased for resale. According to the Ministry of Finance opinion no. 413-00-
      00243/2015-04 from 21 December 2015 purchase of electricity on organized trade market from customers that obtained license for supply or license for wholesale supply is
      considered as purchase for resale from the VAT Law perspective. The place of supply of electricity for which delivery is carried out through transmission or distribution
      network is the place where the recipient, the owner of license for supply or license for wholesale supply has seat or permanent establishment.
      Charged fees represent part of the total fee for supply of electricity and are included in the VAT base for delivery of electricity.
      Supply of electricity for final consumption to Serbian resident registered for VAT/not registered for VAT for which the place of receipt is in Serbia is subject to Serbian VAT in
      accordance with Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 5 of the Serbian VAT Law. Supply of electricity for final consumption to non-Serbian customer for which the place of receipt is
      in Serbia is subject to Serbian VAT in accordance with Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 5 of the Serbian VAT Law.
      Sale of electricity to Serbian customers provided resellers not registered for VAT is subject to VAT in accordance with Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 4 and Article 10
      Paragraph 1 Point 1 of the Serbian VAT Law.
      Note on VAT exemption:
      For supply of electricity to Serbian customer registered for VAT which is provided reseller VAT is not calculated in accordance with Article 10 Paragraph 2 Point 4 of the
      Serbian VAT Law.
      Sale of electricity to non-Serbian customer provided reseller is not subject to VAT in accordance with Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 4 of the Serbian VAT Law.
      Sale of electricity to customers for final consumption for which the place of receipt is not in Serbia is not subject to VAT in accordance with Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 5 of
      the Serbian VAT Law.
      Supplies of electricity on other markets are out of scope of Serbian VAT in accordance with Article 11 Paragraph 1 Point 4 and Point 5 of the Serbian VAT law.
      According to market rules of SEEPEX negative prices are not intended.
      Invoice Number: $%&EX_L1700011              Explanations 2/2                   Invoice Date:2017-06-30
