                            Writing Tips for Ph. D. Students
                                        John H. Cochrane1,2
                                    Graduate School of Business
                                       University of Chicago
                                         5807 S. Woodlawn
                                         Chicago IL 60637.
                                           773 702 3059.
                                  john.cochrane@gsb.uchicago.edu
                 http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/john.cochrane/research/Papers/
                                            June 8, 2005
               1Always put your contact info on the front page so that people can ﬁnd your paper and send
            you comments! It’s the 21st century — get a web page. If your paper is ready for a faculty member
            to read it, it should be on your webpage. Put the date on the paper so people know if they are
            reading a new version.
               2I thank Toby Moskowitz for helpful comments.
              1 Organization
              Figure out the one central and novel contribution of your paper. Write this down in one
              paragraph. As with all your writing, this must be concrete.   Don’t write “I analyzed data
              on executive compensation and found many interesting results.” Explain what the central
              results are.  For example, Fama and French 1992 start their abstract with: “Two easily
              measured variables, size and boo k-to-market equity, combine to capture the cross-sectional
              variation in average stock returns associated with market β, size, leverage, book-to-market
              equity, and earnings-price ratios.”
                  Distilling your one central contribution will take some thought. It will cause some pain,
              because you will start to realize how much you’re going to have to throw out. Once you do
              it, though, you’re in a much better position to focus the paper on that one contribution, and
              help readers to get it quickly.
                  Your readers are busy and impatient. No reader will ever read the whole thing from start
              to ﬁnish. Readers skim. You have to make it easy for them to skim. Most readers want to
              know your basic result. Only a few care how it is diﬀerent from others. Only a few care if
              it holds up with diﬀerent variable deﬁnitions, diﬀerent instrument sets, etc.
                  Organize the paper in “triangular” or “newspaper” style, not in “joke” or “novel” style.
               Notice how newspapers start with the most important part, then ﬁll in background later for
               the readers who kept going and want more details. A good joke or a mystery novel has a
               long windup to the ﬁnal punchline. Don’t write papers like that — put the punchline right
               up front and then slowly explain the joke. Readers don’t stick around to ﬁnd the punchline
               in Table 12.
                  The vast majority of Ph.D. student papers and workshop presentations (not all by stu-
               dents!) get this exactly wrong, and we never really ﬁnd out what the contribution of the
               paper is until the last page, the last table, and the last 5 minutes of the seminar.
                  Agoodpaper is not a travelogue of your search process. We don’t care how you came to
               ﬁgure out the right answer. We don’t care about the hundreds of things you tried that did
               notwork.Saveitforyourmemoirs.
               Abstract
                  Most journals allow 100-150 words. Obey this limit now. The main function of the
               abstract is to communicate the one central and novel contribution, which you just ﬁgured
               out. Youshouldnotmentionotherliteraturneithe abstract. Like everything else, the
               abstract must be concrete. Say what you ﬁnd, not what you look for. Here too, don’t write
               “data are analyzed, theorems are proved, discussion is made..”
                                                           1
              Introduction
                  The introduction should start with what you do in this paper, the major contribution.
              You must explain that contribution so that people can understand it. Don’t just state your
              conclusion: “My results show that the pecking-order theory is rejected.” Give the fact behind
              that result. “In a regression of x on y, controlling for z, the coeﬃcient is q.”
                  The ﬁrst sentence is the hardest. Do not start with philosophy, “Financial economists
              have long wondered if markets are eﬃcient.” Do not start with “The ﬁnance literature has
              long been interested in x.” Your paper must be interesting on its own, and not just because
              lots of other people wasted space on the subject.   Do not start with a long motivation of
              how important the issue is to public policy. All of this is known to writers as “clearing your
              throat.” It’s a waste of space. Start with your central contribution.
                  Three pages is a good upper limit for the introduction.
                  I don’t write a “roadmap” paragraph: “Sectio n 2 sets out the model, section 3 discusses
              identiﬁcation, section 4 gives the main results, section 5 checks for robustness, section 6
              concludes.” It seems a waste of space; readers will ﬁgure it out when they get there and
              I save a paragraph against the editor’s p age count.   Make your own mind up about this
              question; but realize it’s not mandatory.
              Literature review
                  Do not start your introduction with a page and a half of other literature. First, your
              readers are most interested in just ﬁguring out what you do. They can’t start wondering if
              it’s better than what others have done until they understand what you do. Second, most
              readers do not know the literature. It’s goin g to be hard enough to explain your paper in
              simple terms; good luck explaining everyone else’s too.
                  After you’ve explained your contribution, then you can write a brief literature review.
              Make it a separate section of otherwise set it oﬀ sopeoplecanskipitwhoaren’tinterested.
              Remember, it will be very hard for people to understand how your paper is diﬀerent from
              others’ given that they don’t understand your paper yet, and most of them have not read
              the other papers.
                  Be generous in your citations. You do not have to say that everyone else did it all wrong
              for your approach and improvements to be interesting.
                  Literature reviews have gotten way out of hand. It is not necessary to cite every single
              paper in the literature or to write a Journal of Economic Literature style review. The main
              point of the literature review should be to set your paper oﬀ against the 2 or 3 closest
              current papers, and to give proper credit to people who deserve priority for things that
              might otherwise seem new in your paper. Some people worry a lot about strategic citations;
              choosing citations to hint to editors who they should assign as referees and adding loads of
              citations to make sure referees see themselves . Whatever one thinks of these practices, we
              canagreeyoushouldgetridofalltﬂhueﬀ in the ﬁnal version.
                                                           2
                Body of the paper
                   Your task now is to get to the central result as fast as possible.   Most papers do precisely
                the opposite: They have a long motivation, a long literature review, a big complex model
                that then gets ignored, descriptive statistics,   preliminary results, a side discussion or two
                and then ﬁnally Table 12 of “main estimates.” By then we’re all asleep.
                   Here’s the rule: There should be nothing before the main result that a reader does not
                need to know in order to understand the main result.
                Theory
                   In most papers, the “main result” is empirical. There may be some theory or a model,
                but if you (or the editor!) ask “does this paper expand our knowledge of economic theory?,”
                the answer is “no.” The theory is there to help understand the empirical work.         Following
                the rule, then, the theory must be the minimum required for the reader to understand the
                empirical results.
                   Do not write a “general” model and then “for the empirical work, we now specialize the
                general shock process to an AR(1), we use only 2 ﬁrms rather than a continuum, we assume
                agents have quadratic utility,” etc. Work out only the specialized model that you actually
                take to data.
                Empirical work
                   Start with the main result.      Do not do warmup exercises, extensive data description
                (especially of well-known datasets), preliminary estimates, replication of others’ work. Do
                not motivate the speciﬁcation that worked with all your failures. If any of this is really
                important, it can come afterwards or in an appendix.
                   You will mightily resist this advice. If you can’t follow it, at least do not put anything
                before the main result that a reader does not need to know in order to understand the main
                result.
                   Follow the main result with graphs and tables that give intuition, showing how the main
                result is a robust feature of compelling styli zed facts in the data. Follow that with limited
                responses to potential criticisms and robustness checks. Most of those should end up in your
                web appendix.
                Conclusions
                   Really, a conclusions section should not be necessary. If you did a good job of explaining
                your contribution in understandable prose in the introduction, and then documenting those
                claims in the body of the paper, (writing in good triangular style), then saying it all over
                again is pointless. I tried omitting the conclusions section a few times, though, and this was
                too radical for editors and referees.   It is truethatsomepeopleskiptotheconclusionto
                                                                3
      look for the main result, but that’s because they are used to authors who don’t explain it
      well enough in the introduction.
        Thus, conclusions should be short and sweet. Do not restate all of your ﬁndings. One
      statement in the abstract, one in the introduction and once more in the body of the text
      should be enough! You can include a short paragraph or two acknowledging limitations,
      suggesting implications beyond those in the paper. Keep it short though — don’t write your
      grant application here outlining all of your plan s for future research. And don’t speculate;
      the reader wants to know your facts not your opinions.
      Appendices
        Appendices are a great tool. Take that delicious section that has so many insightful
      comments on the literature, the general version of the model, the 57 robustness exercises
      that you did, and dump them in to an appendix. This is a good way to get them out of the
      paper. Eventually you’ll dump them out of the appendix too.
        Seriously, careful authors, referees and criti cs often want to document that the main result
      is robust to various other ways of doing things. You have to do that, but once you’ve veriﬁed
      that it does not make that much diﬀerence and you’ve found the one best way of doing
      things in your main result, it isn’t worth space in the paper to present all the checks and
      variations. Appendices are a great way to solv e this problem, and you can just summarize
      all the things you did in the paper. You can put the appendix on your and the journal’s
      website. (“Bond risk premia” with Monika Piazzesi is an example of a web-appendix gone
      wild.)
      2Writing
      Keep it short
        Keep the paper as short as possible. Every word must count. As you edit the paper ask
      yourself constantly, “can I make the same point in less space?” and “Do I really have to say
      this?” Final papers should be no more than 40 pages. Drafts should be shorter. (Do as I
      say, not as I do!) Shorter is better.
        Don’t repeat things. In other words, if you’ve said it once, you don’t have to say it again.
      Most of all, it uses up extra space and reader’s patience to have to see the same point made
      over and over again. So, once again, repetition is really a bad idea. (Get the picture?!) “In
      other words” is a sign of trouble. Go back and say it once, right.
      General points
        Follow the rule “ﬁrst describe what you do, then explain it, compare it to alternatives,
                          4
      and compare it to others’ procedures” at the micro level as well as the macro level. For
      example, in describing a data transformation, just start with, say, “I adjust income by the
      square root of household size”. Then tell us why adjusting is important, and then talk about
      diﬀerent adjustment functions. Most writers do all this in the reverse order.
        Previews and recalls are a good sign of poor organization. “As we will see in Table 6”
      “Recall from section 2” “this result previews the extra analysis of section 4” all often mean
      you didn’t put things in the right order.
        Strive for precision. Read each sentence carefully. Does each sentence say something,
      anddoesitmeanwhatitsays?
        Document your work. A fellow graduate student must be able to sit down with your
      paper and all alone reproduce every number in it from instructions given in the paper, and
      any print or web appendices. The usual student paper falls short here. There is a sea of
      verbiage, but I can’t ﬁgure out how the central table of results was computed, how standard
      errors were computed, how a simulation was conducted, etc.
        Simple is better. Most students think they have to dress up a paper to look impressive.
      The exact opposite is true: The less math used, the better. The simpler the estimation
      technique, the better.
      Footnotes
        Don’t use footnotes for parenthetical comments. If it’s important, put it in the text. If
      it’s not important, delete it. Parenthetical comments in footnotes usually mean you haven’t
      organized your ideas; you haven’t ﬁgured out where to put this thought in a proper linear
      sequence. Do you really want the reader to stop and read this? Then it should be in the
      text. Do you think the average reader should not stop? Then delete the footnote. Obviously,
      lots of parentheses are just as bad as lots of footnotes.
        Use footnotes only for things that the typical reader genuinely can skip, but a few readers
      might want to have attached to the current point. Long lists of references, simple bits of
      algebra, or other documentation are good candidates for footnotes.
      Tables
        Eachtableshouldhaveaself-containedcaptionsothataskimmingreadercanunderstand
      the fact presented without having to go searching through the text for things like the de ﬁni-
      tions of Greek letters. Don’t go nuts here; some captions are longer than the paper. In my
      opinion, you can leave out details of variable construction and similar items. “Book/market
      ratio” is ﬁne; you don’t have to tell me that you got book values in June from Compustat.
      The goal is to allow a skimming reader to understand the table, not to substitute for the
      detailed documentation that must be in the paper somewhere.
        The caption of a regression table should have the regression equation and the name of
                          5
               the variables, especially the left hand variable.
                   No number should appear in a table that is not discussed in the text. You don’t have to
               mention each number separately; “Row 1 of Table 3 shows a u-shaped pattern” is ok. “Table
               5 shows summary statistics” (period) is not ok. If it’s not worth writing about in the text,
               it’s not worth putting in the table.
                   Use the correct number of signiﬁcant digits, not whatever the program spits out. 4.56783
               with a standard error of 0.6789 should be 4.6 with a standard error of 0.7. Two to three
               signiﬁcant digits are plenty for almost all economics and ﬁnance applications.
                   Use sensible units. Percentages are good. If you can report a number as 2.3 rather than
               0.0000023, that’s usually easier to understand.
               Figures
                   Goodﬁgures really make a paper come alive, and they communicate patterns in the data
               much better than big tables of numbers. Bad or poorly chosen ﬁgures waste a lot of space.
               Again, give a self-contained caption, including a verbal de ﬁnition of each symbol on the
               graphs.Labeltheaxes.Usesensibleunits.Don’tusedottedlinetypesthatareinvisible
               when reproduced. Don’t use dashes for very volatile series.
               Writing tips
                   The most important thing in writing is to keep track of what your reader knows and
               doesn’t know. Most Ph.D. students assume far too much. No, we do not have the details
               of every paper ever written in our heads. Keep in mind what you have explained and what
               you have not.
                   The reader usually wants most of all to understand your basic point, and won’t start
               criticizing it before he or she underst ands it.   That’s behind my advice to ﬁrst state and
               explain what you do, and save defending it and comparing it to other approaches until much
               later.
                   Use active tense. Not: “it is assumed that τ = 3”, “data were constructed as follows..”
               Gee, I wonder who did that assuming and constructing? Search for “is” and “are” in the
               document to root out every single passive sentence.
                   “I” is ﬁne. Don’t use the royal “we” on a sole-authored paper. “I assume that τ =3.”“I
               construct the data as follows.” If it seems like too much “I,” you can often avoid the article
               altogether. For example, I think it’s ok to write “Table 5 presents estimates” rather than “I
               present estimates in Table 5”, though a purist might object to making a Table the subject of
               a sentence. I use “we” to mean “you (the reader) and I,” and “you” for the reader. “We can
               see the u-shaped coeﬃcients in Table 5” or “You can see the u-shaped coeﬃcients” is much
               better than “The u-shaped coeﬃcients can be seen” (passive) or “one can see the u-shaped
               coeﬃcients” (who, exactly?)
                                                               6
                  Much bad writing comes down to trying to avoid responsibility for what you’re saying.
              That’s why people resort to passive sentences, “it should be noted that”, poor organization
              with literature ﬁrst and your idea last, and so on. Take a deep breath, and take responsibility
              forwhatyou’rewriting.
                  Present tense is usually best. You can say “Fama and French 1993 ﬁnd that” even though
              1993 was a while ago. The same goes for your own paper; describe what you ﬁnd in Table
              5 not what you will ﬁnd in Table 5. Most importantly, though, keep the tense consistent.
              Don’t start a paragraph in past tense and ﬁnish it in the future.
                  Use the normal sentence structure: subject, verb, object. Not: “The insurance mech-
              anisms that agents utilize to smooth consumption in the face of transitory earnings   ﬂuc-
              tuations are diverse” Instead: “People use a variety of insurance mechanisms to smooth
              consumption..” (I also changed the starchy “ag ents” to the concrete “people,” and the sim-
              ple “variety” rather than the fancy “diverse.” Actually, this whole sentence probably should
              be dumped; it was introducing a paragraph that described the mechanisms. It’s a throat-
              clearing sentence that violates the rule that e very sentence should mean something. The fact
              that people use a variety of mechanisms is not big news, the news is what the mechanisms
              are.)
                  Avoid technical jargon wherever possible.
                  Writing should be concrete, not abstract. (Insert concrete examples.)
              Little writing tips
                  Don’t use adjectives to describe your work: “striking results” “very signi ﬁcant” coeﬃ-
              cients, etc. If the work merits adjectives, the world will give them to you.
                  If you must use adjectives, don’t use double adjectives. Results are certainly not “very
              novel.”
                  Usesimpleshortwordsnotbigfancywords. “Use”not“utilize.”“several” not“diverse”.
                  It is usually the case that most good writers ﬁnd that everything before the “that” should
              be deleted from a sentence. Read that sentence again starting at “Everything”: it’s true,
              isn’t it? “It should be noted that” is particularly obnoxious. Just say what you want to say.
              “It is easy to show that” means that it isn’t. Search for “that” in the document to get rid
              of these. Similarly, strike “A comment is in order at this point.” Just make the comment.
              These phrases also violate the rule that each sentence should mean what it says. Is the point
              of the sentence really that “it should be noted?” Or is this just a wimpy way to bring up
              the topic?
                  Clothe the naked “this.” “This shows that markets really are irrational...” This what?
              “This” should always have something following it. “This regression shows that....” is ﬁne.
              More generally, this helps (no, that should be “this rule helps,” right?) you to avoid an
              unclear antecedent to the “this.” Often there are three or more things in recent memory
                                                          7
              that “this” could point to.
                 Hyphens are widely misused. Here’s the rule from the JFE style sheet: “Hyphens are
              used for true compound modiﬁers before the noun (e.g., after-tax income, risk-free rate,
              two-day return, three-digit SIC code, value -weighted index) unless part of the compound
              modiﬁer is an adverb ending in ‘ly’ (e.g., previously acquired subsidiary, equally weighted
              index, publicly traded stock). When there is no risk of misinterpretation, the hyphen can be
              omitted, but the treatment must be consistent throughout the paper.” Note the hyphen is
              optional, so you don’t have to construct monstro sities like “continually-rebalanced-equally-
              weighted portfolio.” Don’t use hyphens in othe r circumstances, e.g. “The paper focuses on
              small-stocks.”
                 People forget Greek letter deﬁnitions. If you deﬁne them once in an obscure part of the
              text and then use naked references (“θ =3givesthebestﬁt”) no one will know what you’re
              talking about. Deﬁne them clearly in an easy-to-ﬁnd place. It’s best to give them a name
              too,andthenremindpeopleofthenameandthenumbeﬁrnd(“Ithe best ﬁt when the
              elasticity of substitution θ equals 3.”) This is the one place where a little repetition isn’t
              bad.  If you’ve reminded them of the name in the last paragraph or two, however, you can
              use the naked letter.
                 Strike “I leave x for future research.” We’re less interested in your plans and excuses than
              we are in your memoirs.
                 Never use the words “illustrative test” or “illu strative empirical work.” Never do illus-
              trative work. Do real empirical work or don’t do any at all. Illustrating technique with
              empirical work you don’t believe in is a waste of space. Even if you do it, there is no faster
              way to get readers to fall asleep than to tell them that what you’re doing doesn’t really
              matter.
                 Youdon’tneedto“assume”thingsaboutamodel. Don’twrite“Iassumethatconsumers
              have power utility” (And, of course, don’t write “it is assumed that utility is power,” right?)
              You are describing a model, not reality, so you can just state the model structure. “Con-
              sumers have power utility.” (“In this model” is understood.) Save “assumptions” for things
              that really do modify the real world, “I assume there are no shifts in the demand curve so
              that the regression of price on quantity identiﬁes the supply curve.”
                 Keep down the number of clauses in your sentences, and the number of things kept
              hanging.
                 “Where” refers to a place. “In which” refers to a model. Don’t write “models where con-
              sumers have uninsured shocks,” write “models in which consumers have uninsured shocks.”
                 Don’t abbreviate authors’ names, “FF show that size really does matter.” There is always
              enough space to spell out people’s names. You’d want them to write out yours, no?
                 It is appropriate to thank people who have helped you in the author footnote. I don’t
              add the qualiﬁer about not blaming people I thank for comments for mistakes. It goes
                                                        8
      without saying. I don’t list every single plac e I’ve given the workshop in the thanks. I’m
      not ungrateful, but the long list can get out of hand.
        Don’t start your paper with a cute quotation.
        Don’t overuse italics. (I use them far too much.) It’s best to use them only when the
      emphasis in a sentence would otherwise not be clear — but maybe then you should rewrite
      the sentence so that the emphasis really is clear. (Who is that shouting in here?)
        When describing the sign of a casual link, one direction is enough. “When Jane goes
      up (down) on the teeter-totter, Billy go es down (up) on the other side,” the stuﬀ in the
      parentheses is distracting. Add “and vice versa” if you must.
        Every sentence should have a subject, verb and object. No sentences like “No sentences
      like this.”
      3Tipsforempiricalwork
      These tips verge on “how to do empirical work” rather than just “how to write empirical
      work,” but in the larger picture “doing” and “writing” are not that di ﬀerent.
        What are the three most important things for empirical work? Identi ﬁcation, Identiﬁca-
      tion, Identiﬁcation. Describe your identiﬁcation strategy clearly. (Understand what it is,
      ﬁrst!) Much empirical work boils down to a claim that “A causes B,” usually documented
      by some sort of regression. Explain how the causal e ﬀect you think you see in the data is
      identiﬁed.
        1. Describe what economic mechanism caused th e dispersion in your right hand variables.
         No, God does not hand us true natural experiments very often.
        2. Describe what economic mechanism constitutes the error term. What things other
         than your right hand variable cause variation in the left hand variable?
        3. Hence, explain why you think the error term is uncorrelated with the right hand
         variables in economic terms. There is no way to talk about this crucial assumption
         unlessyouhavedoneitems1and2!
        4. Explain the economics of why your instruments are correlated with the right hand
         variable and not with the error term.
        5. Do you understand the diﬀerence between an instrument and a control? In regressing
         y on x, when should z be used as an additional variable on the right hand side and
         when should it be an instrument for x?
        6. Describe the source of variation in the data that drives your estimates, for every single
         number you present. For example, the underlying facts will be quite di ﬀerent as you
                          9
         add ﬁxed eﬀects. With ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, the regression coeﬃcient is driven by how
         the variation over time within each ﬁrm. Without ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, the coeﬃcient is
         (mostly) driven by variation across ﬁrms at a moment in time.
        7. Are you sure you’re looking at a demand curve, not a supply curve? As one way to
         clarify this question, ask “whose behavior are you modeling?”
         Example: Suppose you are interested in how interest rates aﬀect housing demand, so
         yourunthenumberofnewloansoninterestrates. Butmaybewhenhousingdemandis
         large for other reasons, demand for mortgages (and other borrowing demand correlated
         with demand for mortgages) drives interest rates up. You implicitly assumed stable
         demand, so that an increase in price would lower quantity. But maybe the data are
         generated by a stable supply, so that increased demand raises the price, or some of
         both. Are you modeling the behavior of house purchasers or the behavior of savers
         (how savings responds to interest rates)?
        8. Are you sure causality doesn’t run from y to x,orfromz to y and x simultaneously?
         Think of the obvious reverse-causality stories.
         Example: You can also think about the last example as causality: Do interest rates
         cause changes in housing demand or vice versa (or does the overall state of the economy
         cause both to change)?
        9. Consider carefully what controls should and should not be in the regression. Most
         papers have far too many right hand variables. You do not want to include all the
         “determinants” of y on the right hand side.
         (a) High R2 is usually bad — it means you ran left shoes = α+β right shoes +γprice
           +error. Right shoes should not be a control!
         (b) Don’t run a regression like wage = a + b education + c industry + error. Of
           course, adding industry helps raise the R2, and industry is an important other
           determinant of wage (it was in the error term if you did #2). But the whole point
           of getting an education is to help people move to better industries, not to move
           from assistant burger-ﬂipper to chief burger-ﬂipper.
        Give the stylized facts in the data that drive your result, not just estimates and p values.
      For a good example, look at Fama and French’s 1996 “Multifactor explanations.” In the old
      stylewewouldneedonenumber:theGRStest.FamaandFrenchshowustheexpected
      returns of each portfolio, they show us the beta of each portfolio, and they convince us that
      the pattern of expected returns matches the pattern of betas. This is the most successful
      factor model of the last 15 years ...even though the GRS test is a disaster! They were
      successful because they showed us the stylized facts in the data.
        Explain the economic signiﬁcance of your results. Explain the economic magnitude of
      the central numbers, not just their statistical signiﬁcance. Especially in large panel data sets
      even the tiniest of eﬀects is “statistically signi ﬁcant.” (And when people show up with the
      usual 2.10 t statistic in large panel data sets, the e ﬀect is truly tiny!)
                          10
                  Of course, every important number should include a standard error.
               4 Seminar presentations
               You will not believe how fast the time will go by.
                  Since time is limited, it’s especially important to get to the point. We can’t skim to the
               important stuﬀ in a seminar!
                  You don’t need any literature review or motivation in a seminar. Just get to the point.
               Gene Fama usually starts his seminars with “Look at table 1.” That’s a good model to
               emulate.
                  Don’t “preview” results. It wastes time; why say it twice rather than say it once, right?
                  Don’t make slides with a bullet point for every word you intend to say. This forces you
               into a preplanned order, and then you can’t change on the ﬂywhenyouﬁgure out how fast
               time is going by.  Slides are ﬁne that only contain equations, tables and graphs — things
               we really need to see. At most use words for the one or two really important things you
               want people to know, e.g. “Identiﬁcation: interest rates do not respond to ﬁscal shocks in the
               Ricardian model.” Also, you want people to remember the structure of the model, de ﬁnitions
               of variables, etc. If you have too much junk on the slides, people can’t see the utility function
               while you’re talking about the production function, so they get lost. People don’t remember
               equations from one slide to the next.
                  You have to leave slides up for a decent amount of time in order for people to digest
               them. That means you will not be able to put up 1 slide per minute!
                  As in writing the paper, your main objective is to get to the #1 important contribution
               as fast as possible.
                  Most seminars are a disaster. They start with pointless motivation and policy implica-
               tions, which the audience can’t follow since we don’t know the result. Then we get a long
               literature review, which is even more boring since we don’t know the point of this paper
               muchless what everyone else did. Then we get a results preview. Usually, the presenter says
               “I’ll preview the results now because I may not have time to get to them all,” a strangely
               self-fulﬁlling prophecy. Since showing the main results is the only reason you came, why not
               just start right now! Worse,thereasonwerunoutoftimeisbecausewewastedhalfan
               hour on the stupid preview! The seminar then bogs down as people start asking questions
               about the previewed results; most of the questions are dumb (“I measure the demand elas-
               ticity at 0.3.” “But how did you identify supply shifts?”) since they will be explained in a
               proper presentation of the results. But the questions are totally reasonable since the claim
               with no documentation is meaningless. Next, w e get (in empirical papers) some “theory”
               that is really beside the point and only serves to provoke more needless argument (no, there
               really is no way to distinguish the “behavioral” and “rational” explanation. Clever audience
                                                            11
      members will come up with stories that reverse all the signs.) Then we get some distracting
      preliminary results and tables and graphs of un related observations. More pointless discus-
      sion erupts; people don’t know what point the speaker is trying to make and the discussion
      goes oﬀ in to tangents. Finally the speaker sees there is only 10 minutes to go, tells people
      to be quiet, and the main results go by in a big rush. Everyone is tired and confused and
      doesn’t follow anything. I timed the ﬁnance workshop last winter quarter and not one paper
      got to the main results in under an hour!
        Listen to the questions, all the way to the end, then count to three before answering.
      Yes, you’re in a rush, and yes, you think you can guess what the question will be and you
      know the answer. This isn’t a game show, and much of the time you actually don’t know
      what the question will be.
        Keep a sheet of paper handy. You may not have a quick answer to every question, and
      some questions may point to good things to change in the paper.
        Youcannotmakeittoosimple.Mostpresens,teespr ecially Ph. D. students overestimate
      dramatically how much theory people can digest in one sitting, and how quickly they can
      memorize and digest models and results.
        Speak loudly, slowly and clearly.
        There’s nothing wrong with ending early!
      5Conclusion
      May economists falsely think of themselves as scientists who just “write up” research. We
      are not; we are primarily writers. Economics and ﬁnance papers are essays. Most good
      economists spend at least 50% of the time they put into any project on writing. For me, it’s
      more like 80%.
        Pay attention to the writing in papers you read, and notice the style adopted by authors
      you admire.
        I got a lot out of reading William Zinsser’s On Writing Well, and D. McCloskey’s Rhetoric
      of Economics. I also found Glenn Ellison’s “The slowdown of the economics publishing
      process” in the JPE useful for thinking about how papers should be structured (and refereed
      and edited, but that’s another story).
                          12
