    STAYING  
    SAFE
    STEPS TO TAKE FOR A PERSON    
    WITH DEMENTIA
     MAKE SAFETY A PRIORITY 
     BEFORE IT’S A PROBLEM
     Safety is important for everyone, but the 
     need for a comprehensive safety plan is 
     particularly important for a person living 
     with Alzheimer’s as the disease progresses. 
     Alzheimer’s causes a number of changes in 
     the brain and body that may affect safety. 
     Depending on the stage of the disease, 
     these can include:
     »  Judgment: forgetting how to use 
       household appliances.
     »  Sense of time and place: getting lost on 
       one’s own street.
     »  Behavior: becoming easily confused, 
       suspicious or fearful.
     »  Physical ability: having trouble with 
       balance.
     »  Senses: experiencing changes in vision, 
       hearing, sensitivity to temperature or 
       depth perception.
     Taking measures to improve safety 
     can prevent injuries and help a person 
     with dementia feel more relaxed, less 
     overwhelmed and maintain his or her 
     independence longer.
     Visit alz.org/safety for a comprehensive 
     offering of safety information, tips and 
     resources.
    CONTENTS
    1. Safety at home  ............................................... p.2
    2. Wandering and getting lost ..................... p.6
    3. Driving and Alzheimer’s ............................. p.8
    4. Traveling and Alzheimer’s  ......................... p.10 
    5. Emergency preparedness ......................... p.12
                             1
                  SAFETY  
                  AT HOME
      1. 
       If safety measures are in place, an individual with 
       dementia can live in the comfort of his or her 
       own home or a caregiver’s home. As the disease 
       progresses, the person’s abilities will change. But 
       with some creativity and flexibility, the home can 
       be adapted to support these changes.
       Evaluate your environment
       A person with dementia may be at risk in certain 
       areas of the home or outdoors. Pay special 
       attention to garages, work rooms, basements 
       and outside areas where there are more likely to 
       be tools, chemicals, cleaning supplies and other 
       items that may require supervision.
       Avoid injury during daily activities 
       Most accidents in the home occur during daily 
       activities such as eating, bathing and using the 
       restroom. Take special precautions at these times. 
          » T  ry to avoid serving food and beverages that 
             are too hot. The person with dementia may 
             not remember to check the temperature.
          » I nstall walk-in showers. Add grab bars to the 
             shower or tub and at the edge of the vanity to 
             allow for independent, safe movement. 
          » A  dd textured stickers to slippery surfaces. 
             Apply adhesives to keep throw rugs and 
             carpeting in place, or remove rugs completely.
          » M   onitor the hot water temperature in 
             the shower or bath. Consider installing an 
             automatic thermometer.
       Adapt to vision limitations
       Dementia sometimes causes changes in vision 
       that make it difficult for a person to decipher 
       between colors and understand what he or  
       she sees.
       2
    » C  hanges in levels of light can be disorienting. 
     Create an even level by adding extra lights in 
     entries, outside landings, and areas between 
     rooms, stairways and bathrooms. 
    » U  se night-lights in hallways, bedrooms  
     and bathrooms.
   Beware of dangerous objects and substances 
   Even the most basic appliance or household object 
   can become dangerous. Take precautions to 
   ensure these items do not become safety hazards.
    » U  se appliances that have an auto shut-off 
     feature. Keep them away from water sources 
     such as sinks.
    » I nstall a hidden gas valve or circuit breaker on 
     the stove so a person with dementia cannot 
     turn it on. Consider removing the knobs.
    » S  tore grills, lawn mowers, power tools, knives 
     and cleaning products in a secure place.
    » D  iscard toxic plants and decorative fruits that 
     may be mistaken for real food.
                             3
    » R  emove vitamins, prescription drugs, sugar 
     substitutes and seasonings from the kitchen 
     table and counters. Medications should be 
     kept in a locked area at all times.
    » S  upervise the use of tobacco and alcohol. 
     Both may have harmful side effects and may 
     interact dangerously with some medications.
   4
   Firearms in the home
   In the vast majority of cases, the presence 
   of firearms or other weapons in a household 
   creates no problems for responsible gun owners 
   and others in the home. However, if someone 
   is living with Alzheimer’s disease or another 
   dementia, firearms can pose a significant risk for 
   everyone. Consider the following: 
    » L  ocking or disabling a gun may not  
     be enough. 
     As the disease progresses, people with 
     dementia sometimes misperceive danger 
     and may do whatever seems necessary to 
     protect themselves, even if no threat exists. 
     These actions can include breaking into gun 
     cabinets, finding ammunition and loading 
     guns. Preventing a gun from firing may 
     not prevent the person with the disease or 
     others from being harmed.
    » C  onsider removing guns from the home to 
     fully protect the family from an accident .
     Family members sometimes attempt to hide 
     their firearms or ammunition to prevent the 
     person with dementia from accessing them. 
     They may lock the guns in an attic or in the 
     trunk of a car, or keep ammunition outside 
     of the home. These are good first steps, but 
     they do not ensure that the person will not 
     find the gun or appear to be holding a loaded 
     weapon, thereby causing those around the 
     person to react.
   Just as legal, financial, care and driving plans 
   are best made early in the disease process, it’s 
   important to consider current and future gun 
   safety. Put plans in place for what to do with 
   firearms or other weapons both immediately and 
   when the person is no longer capable of handling 
   them safely.
                             5
                   WANDERING AND 
                   GETTING LOST
      2.
       Six in 10 people with dementia will wander and 
       become lost; many do so repeatedly. And it 
       can happen at any stage of the disease. If not 
       found within 24 hours, up to half of wandering 
       individuals will suffer serious injury or death. It’s 
       important to be aware of the risk factors.
       Signs of wandering behavior
       Wandering or confusion about location may be 
       an issue when the person:
          » F  orgets how to get to familiar places.
          » R  eturns from a regular walk or drive later 
             than usual. 
          » T  alks about fulfilling former obligations, like 
             going to work. 
          » T   ries or wants to “go home,” even when  
             at home.
          » I  s restless, makes repetitive movements  
             or paces. 
          » H  as a hard time locating familiar places like 
             the bathroom, bedroom or dining room.
          » A  cts as if doing a hobby or chore, but nothing 
             gets done (e.g., moves around pots and dirt 
             without actually planting anything). 
          » A  cts nervous or anxious in crowded areas, 
             such as shopping malls or restaurants.
       Tips to reduce wandering
          » P  rovide opportunities for the person to 
             engage in structured, meaningful activities 
             throughout the day.
          » M   ake sure the person gets some exercise, 
             which can reduce anxiety, agitation and 
             restlessness. 
       6
    » P  lace deadbolts either high or low on 
     exterior doors if you worry about wandering 
     at night.
    » E  nsure all basic needs are met, including 
     toileting, nutrition and thirst. 
    » I nvolve the person in daily activities, such as 
     folding laundry or preparing dinner. 
    » R  eassure the person if he or she feels lost, 
     abandoned or disoriented.
    » I f the person is still able to drive, consider 
     using a GPS device to help if they get lost.
    » I f the person is no longer driving, remove 
     access to car keys — a person with dementia 
     may not just wander by foot. The person may 
     forget that he or she can no longer drive.
    » A  void busy places that are confusing and can 
     cause disorientation, such as shopping malls.
    » D  o not leave someone with dementia 
     unsupervised in new surroundings.
    WE CAN HELP
    MedicAlert® + Alzheimer’s Association 
    Safe Return® is a 24-hour nationwide 
    emergency response service for individuals 
    with Alzheimer’s or another dementia who 
    wander or have a medical emergency. We 
    provide assistance no matter when or where 
    the person is reported missing.
      » Call the Alzheimer’s Association® at 
       800.272.3900 (TTY: 866.403.3073)  
       to learn more.
      » Call 888.572.8566 or visit  
       alz.org/safety to enroll.
                             7
                       DRIVING  
                       AND ALZHEIMER’S
        3.    
         Driving demands good judgment, quick reaction 
         time and split-second decision making. Because 
         of the progressive nature of Alzheimer’s, a 
         person with the disease will eventually become 
         unable to drive.
         It is helpful to have a conversation early on about 
         how independence can be maintained when he 
         or she can no longer drive. Putting a plan in place 
         can help ease the transition. 
         Signs that it may be time to stop driving:
             » F  orgetting how to locate familiar places.
             » F  ailing to observe traffic signals.
             » M    aking slow or poor decisions.
             » D  riving at inappropriate speeds.
             » B  ecoming angry and confused while driving.
             » H  itting curbs.
             » U  sing poor lane control.
             » M    aking errors at intersections.
             » C  onfusing the brake and gas pedals.
             » R  eturning from a routine drive later  
                than usual.
         8
    DEMENTIA AND DRIVING 
    RESOURCES
    Visit the Alzheimer’s Association Dementia 
    and Driving Resource Center (alz.org/driving) 
    for tips and information. This website features:
      » V  ideo scenarios showing four different 
       families discussing driving and dementia.
      » T  ips and strategies for planning ahead 
       and handling resistance.
      » C  ommon signs of unsafe driving. 
      » R  esources for alternative methods of 
       transportation. 
      » A  dditional information on driving  
       and safety. 
   The Dementia and Driving Resource Center is a product of a 
   cooperative agreement between the Alzheimer’s Association and the 
   National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA).
                                 9
                                                                           TRAVELING 
                           4.                                              AND ALZHEIMER’S
                             Living with dementia may not mean that it’s 
                             necessary to stop traveling; it simply requires 
                             careful planning. The following may help ensure 
                             a safe and enjoyable trip: 
                                         » P  ack copies of important documents (see 
                                                     page 13), medication, travel itinerary, water, 
                                                     snacks and activities.
                                         » I t can be helpful to stick with the familiar. If 
                                                     possible, travel to familiar destinations that 
                                                     involve minimal changes to daily routine.
                                         » A c                             hange in environment can trigger 
                                                     wandering behavior. Consider enrolling in 
                                                     MedicAlert + Safe Return. If you are already 
                                                     enrolled, notify the program of travel plans.
                                         » I f staying in a hotel, consider informing the 
                                                     staff about your specific needs ahead of 
                                                     time so they can prepare to assist.
                                         » T  ravel during the time of day that is best for 
                                                     the person with dementia. 
                                         » C  ontact the Alzheimer’s Association to 
                                                     find the nearest office that can provide 
                                                     assistance at your travel destination. 
                             Air travel
                             Moving through airports requires focus 
                             and attention, as the level of activity can be 
                             distracting, overwhelming and difficult to 
                             understand. Here are a few things to keep in 
                             mind for air travel:
                                         » A  void flights that require tight connections.
                                         » E  ven if walking is not difficult, consider 
                                                     requesting a wheelchair so that an attendant 
                                                     can help you get from place to place. Most 
                                                     airlines ask for at least 48 hours notice.
                             10
    » C  ontact the Transportation Security 
     Administration (TSA) at least 72 hours prior 
     to travel for information about what to 
     expect during the security screening. While 
     at the airport, remind the person what is 
     involved and consider telling the agent at 
     the security checkpoint that the person has 
     dementia.
    » D  o not hesitate to ask for assistance from 
     airport employees and in-flight crew.
    » I f the person needs help using the restroom, 
     look for companion care bathrooms so you 
     can more easily assist and will not have to 
     leave the person unattended.
    » S  tay with the person at all times.
                             11
                           EMERGENCY 
                           PREPAREDNESS
         5.    
           Disaster situations, such as a hurricane or fire, 
           or other emergency situations can significantly 
           impact everyone’s safety, but they can be 
           especially upsetting and confusing for individuals 
           with dementia. Being prepared for an emergency 
           is crucial.
           Prepare an emergency kit that includes:
               » C  opies of important documents.
               » A c       ouple sets of extra clothing.
               » E  xtra medication.
               »  Incontinence products.
               » I dentification items, such as a MedicAlert +  
                    Safe Return ID bracelet.
               » A r       ecent picture of the person with dementia.
               » B  ottled water.
               » F  avorite items or foods.
           12
             If an emergency occurs and you need to 
             evacuate, make sure your plans are compatible 
             with the person with dementia’s specific needs. 
             For example, if he or she uses a walker or 
             wheelchair, be sure your emergency plan takes 
             this into consideration.
             If an individual lives in a residential facility, learn 
             about its disaster and evacuation plans. Find out 
             who is responsible for evacuating the person in 
             the event of an emergency.
             Staying safe becomes increasingly important as 
             Alzheimer’s disease progresses. With appropriate 
             planning and accommodation, you can ensure 
             that everyone is as safe as possible.
                  IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS TO 
                  KEEP ON HAND
                  Keep copies of the following documents in an 
                  easily accessible location at home as well as in 
                  another secure location away from home. 
                  » D  octors’ names and contact information.
                  » A li         st of current medications and dosages.
                  » P  hone numbers and addresses of local 
                       police and fire departments, hospitals and 
                       poison control.
                  » A li         st of food and drug allergies.
                  » C  opies of legal papers, such as a living will, 
                       advance directives and power of attorney.
                  » N  ames and contact information of friends 
                       and family members to call in case of an 
                       emergency.
                  » I nsurance information, including policy 
                       number and member name.
                                                                                                                                               13
                            alz.org/safety
                  The Alzheimer’s Association Safety Center offers 
                  tips and resources, including:
                  »  M   edicAlert® + Alzheimer’s Association  
                      Safe Return®.
                  »  D  ementia and Driving Resource Center.
                            alz.org/care
                  The Alzheimer’s and Dementia Caregiver Center 
                  provides reliable information and helpful tools.
                            alz.org/findus
                  We’re in communities across the country.
                            800.272.3900
                  24/7 Helpline – Available all day, every day.  
                  (TTY: 866.403.3073)
         The Alzheimer’s Association is the leading voluntary health 
         organization in Alzheimer’s care, support and research. 
         Our mission is to eliminate Alzheimer’s disease through 
         the advancement of research; to provide and enhance 
         care and support for all affected; and to reduce the risk 
            of dementia through the promotion of brain health. 
            Our vision is a world without Alzheimer’s disease®.
                                                                                    ®
                         800.272.3900  |  alz.org
         This is an official publication of the Alzheimer’s Association but may be distributed 
         by unaffiliated organizations and individuals. Such distribution does not constitute 
         an endorsement of these parties or their activities by the Alzheimer’s Association.
         © 2016 Alzheimer’s Association®. All rights reserved.         Rev. Dec16   775-10-0014
