                         Jul. 2008, Volume 5, No.7 (Serial No.44)                    US-China Education Review, ISSN154 8-6613, USA
                                                                                                                      
                                                                   The differences between novels and films 
                                                               —Enhance literature teaching by using films 
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                               BAO Bo 
                                                    (Foreign Language Department, Shaanxi Institute of Education, Xi’an Shaanxi 710061, China) 
                               Abstract: Many films are based on novels. However them uses dif, each ferent ways to of                                                                                   tell the similar 
                         stories. The paper discusses the differences from several aspects in terms of their nature, ways of narration, as well 
                         as the effect they bring about. It mainly focuses on the special benefits of using films in English language teaching. 
                         Finally, a sample film-based activity which could be used to enhance language classroom is illustrated.   
                               Key words: novels; films; English language teaching   
                                  
                                 In the twentieth century, there are two culturally dominant ways of experiencing fiction available to us: the 
                         visual forms of film and the prose forms of novel (Montgomery, et al., 1992, p. 191). Indeed, these two different 
                         media have gained millions of fans all over the world. ny liMaterary masterpieces have been represented through 
                         films. Victor Fleming’s Gone with the Wind (1939), Ann Lee’s Sense and Sensibility (1995), Joe Wright’sPride  
                         and Prejudice (2005) are all based on novels. Quite often, people like to compare the novel with the film that tells 
                         the same story, and many people are inclined to agree with the opinion that films could hardly defeat the novels in 
                         telling the same story. Presumably, on one hand, thims isainly becaus                                                          e of theth afactt it i  s the novel that 
                         introduces the story to the readers first. Therefore, wever hatthe author writes inst toryhe  occupies the readers’ 
                         mind and become the only “correct” way of telling a certain story. On the other hand, the paper conceives that the 
                         differences between novels and films by their very natu dreecide that these two forms of media will never create 
                         the same effects on presenting stories.   
                                   1. Important differences between films and novels 
                                 1.1 Formal differences: Visual image vs. verbal sign 
                                 The philosopher C. S. Peirce used the tesign and rms icon to explain the relationship between two things 
                         when one thing can represent another (Montgomery, 1992, p. 193). The term sign refers to the arbitrary 
                         relationship between two things, for example, a word “flower” can be a sign of a flower; also, a picture of a flower 
                         can be an icon of the flower which shows a less arbitrary relationship between the two. Obviously, a picture of a 
                         flower is much closer to a flower than the word “flower” (Monaco, 1981). As mediums of representation, film is 
                         made of icons, while prose if made of signs (Montgomery 1,992, p. 193). In other words, the images in the film 
                         have more direct and immediate relationship to what it describes, while the words seldom do. Additionally, the 
                         sound in the film could greatly enhance the audiences’ understanding. Therefore, it is true that film’s grasp of 
                                                                                 
                                                                                
                             BAO Bo (1981- ), M.A., Foreign Language Destitute ofpartment, Shaanxi In Education; research fields: applied linguistics, 
                         computer assisted language learning. 
                         58 
                                   The differences between novels and films—Enhance literature teaching by using films 
                reality can seem much more direct and easily intelligible. On one hand, these features of the film make it easier to 
                be understood than that of the novel; however, on the other hand, it fails to describe something which is abstract, 
                more specifically, people’s inner world. This will be discussed in detail next. 
                      1.2 Surface vs. interior   
                      Since the camera can only show the surface, the fhas tilm  o use some other methods to express people’s 
                thought. For example, in the first scene as for the ball in Joe WrigPride &ht’s      Prejudice (2005), the film could 
                show the excited people, the beautiful ladies and the handsome gentlemen as well as their actions. However, it 
                can’t reveal Austen’s detailed description about people’s changing attitude toward Darcy, specifically, how “Mr. 
                Darcy soon drew the attention of the room” at first, and why “everybody thought Darcy was the proudest, most 
                disagreeable in the world”, and finally, “everybody hoped that he would never come there again”. The film 
                presents this rather complicated course through Darcy’s cold facial expression and the dialogue between Elizabeth 
                and Charlotte. Obviously, this is far from enough to describe the proud and disagreeable Darcy. In contrast, the 
                subtle change in people’s inner world toward Darcy could be revealed vividly and clearly in the novel. This 
                difference between film and novel actually gives the audiences and readers different experiences.   
                      1.3 Narration   
                      Montgomery, et al describe that narrative film can be thought of as story without the level of narration—a 
                tale without a teller (1992, p. 193). This is actually caused by its iconic nature. The films show people the story, 
                while the novels tell people the story.   
                      According to Monaco, the novels could be narrated either by the first-person narrator or by someone outside 
                it, the omniscient narrator (1981, p. 172). Most films are also told from an omniscient point view. That is to say, 
                we can see and hear whatever the director wants us to hear and see. In addition, by their very nature, the visual 
                images directly display what things are happening whenthe a      udiences watch the film. Bluestone claims that “the 
                novel has three tenses; the film has only one” (Giddings, et al., 1990, p. 15).   
                      Consequently, the audience tends to believe that the image tells the truth. Interestingly, as Monaco describes 
                that Hitchcock had one of his characters narrate a flasck whihba     ch is a lie. The audiences reacted angrily when 
                they finally realized that it was false, because they weren’t able to believe that the image could lie (Monaco, 1981, 
                p. 173). However, the novel writers could handle this very easily.   
                      1.4 Sound vs. silence 
                      It is true that the sound of the film could greatlyen hance the audiences’ comprehension. The film audiences 
                could receive the information from both images and sounds, while the novel readers only from the text. The sound 
                in the film can be classified into three types, namspeecely,  h, music and noise. In some situations, even any of 
                them alone could tell a story. Though as accurate as tnohe vel can not achieve, the sound in the film could create 
                the environment in which the audiences could feel the characters’ emotion. The magic of the sound in films is that 
                it could duplicate the sounds in real life, and together with the images, it creates and displays the real life to the 
                audiences directly and immediately. By contrast, the novel could only describe things through words. The film 
                director could show “a successful ball” with fantastic music, joyful laughter, excited conversation and all kinds of 
                noise, but what the novel writer could do is using silent words. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the 
                multilayered film is much more powerful in creating the real life than the novel. However, from another point of 
                view, the weak point of novel can be a great advantage. It is just the silent and arbitrary nature of the signs in the 
                                                                                                                                    59
                                  The differences between novels and films—Enhance literature teaching by using films 
                novel provided unlimited space for the reader. Consetlyq, euenvery reader could create the most excellent and 
                imaginative “film” in their mind.   
                     2. Films in language teaching   
                     The above features of the films actually have great significance in English language teaching. More clearly, 
                using films could facilitate the English literature teachiIt isng.  necessary to clarify that the “literature teaching” 
                here actually refers to “using literary texts as languaeacge hit ng resource” rather than “as an object of literary 
                study” (Abersold & Field, 1997, p. 157). The using of video materials could enhance the students’ motivation and 
                provide them different ways of input. Obviously, the learning materials with visual element are more meaningful 
                and alive and help to bring the real world into the classroom.   
                     Stempleski and Tomalin claim that using video will facilitate language teaching through motivation, 
                communication, non-verbal aspects of communication and cross-cultural comparison. Thus, in literature teaching, 
                these aspects could be greatly enhanc by usined   g films as complementary materials. Unlike the book, the film 
                could present the real life in the classroom lively. It provides opportunities for the students to see the people, the 
                customs and the cultures of the target language community. Furthermore, “the non-verbal aspects such as gestures, 
                expressions, posture, dress and surroundings are as queelont as what we actually say” (Stempleski & Tomalin, 
                1990). Only if the students see the non-verbal aspects of communication, could they know the functions of them 
                in real communication.   
                     However, the using of films in literature teaching does not mean merely play the film for the students in the 
                classroom. Actually, the teacher need to design some activities based on the films and the novel, so as to create the 
                environment in which the students could iectinvteraely witct effh each other. Also, the students’ language 
                proficiency and their specific needs should be taken into account. The paper will illustrate a sample activity which 
                is designed according to the features of the films in the following. 
                     Activity 1: Watching & role play 
                     (1) Level: Intermediate and above; 
                     (2) Objective: Understanding the importance of non-verbal communication (body language & facial 
                expressions), discussion, speaking, motivation, collaborative learning; 
                     (3) Rationale: (a) The non-verbal aspects are as eloquent as what we actually say” (Stempleski & Tomalin 
                1990); (b) Students could not acquire the knowledge about non-verbal communication through reading the novels; 
                     (4) Materials: Any sequence with clear body language and facial expression;   
                     (5) Materials length: Two sequences about 6 minutes; 
                     (6) Activity time: 30 minutes. 
                     Process: 
                     (1) Tell the students that they will watch two sequenwices th no sound. Their first task is to understand the 
                main idea; 
                     (2) Play the first sequence with sound off; 
                     (3) Students discuss the situation and characters in groups;   
                     (4) Play the second sequence with sound off; 
                     (5) Students discuss the situation and characters in groups; 
                60   
                                         The differences between novels and films—Enhance literature teaching by using films 
                         (6) Ask the students to list all the similarities and differences in the two sequences in terms of location, 
                   character, things happening, attitude, result, etc.; 
                         (7) Share the results in the class; 
                         (8) Divide the students into two groups. Each group will be given a role play task about one sequence;   
                         (9) Play both sequences with sound. Get the students to do brief note-taking about the conversations in the 
                   sequences. Give them the opportunity to recompose the plot on the basis of the original one; 
                         (10) Each group acts their play out. 
                          3. Conclusion 
                         From the discussion and the sample activity displayed above, it is reasonable to claim that the films could 
                   enhance the English language teaching in many aspects. Because of its very nature, the films could create lots of 
                   advantageous opportunities in the language class that thnoe vels couldn’t. It could record and represent all kinds 
                   of voices and actions in various authentic situations.reover Mo               , it is like a window on English-language culture. 
                   Therefore, the teachers should design appropriate activities based on diferent fif                     lms according to the specific 
                   needs. Actually, there are diversified ways of usinlms that hg fi ave great potentiality in facilitating English 
                   learning. The paper suggests that a further study is needed to explore how to use films in a deeper and wider scale 
                   in English classroom.     
                    
                   References: 
                   Aebersold, J. A. & Field, M. L. (1997). From reader to reading teach—erIssues and strategies for second lan.                                     guage classrooms
                        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
                   Giddings, R., Selby, K. & Wensley, C. (1990). Screening the novel: The theory and practice of literary dramatization. London: 
                        Macmillan.  
                   Montgomery, M., A. Durant, S. Mills, N. Fabb & T. Furniss. (1992). Ways of reading: Advanced reading skills for students of English 
                        literature. London: Routledge. 
                   Monaco, J. (1981). How to read a film: The art, technologlanguage, history and theory of y,              film and media. New York; Oxford: 
                        Oxford University Press. 
                   Stempleski, S. & B.Tomalin. (1990). Video in action. London: Prentice Hall International English Language Teaching. 
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                (Edited by Lee and Lily) 
                    
                                                                                                                                                           61
