                          
                                   Information about your procedure from 
                                   The British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) 
                This leaflet contains evidence-based information about your proposed 
                urological procedure.  We have consulted specialist surgeons during its 
                preparation, so that it represents best practice in UK urology.  You should 
                use it in addition to any advice already given to you.   
                To view the online version of this leaflet, type the text below into your web 
                browser: 
                http://www.baus.org.uk/_userfiles/pages/files/Patients/Leaflets/BCG.pdf 
                 
                                                        Key Points 
                   •  This involves having a catheter (plastic tube) passed into your 
                       bladder to instil an anti-cancer drug called BCG 
                   •  BCG is a vaccine that is used against tuberculosis; it contains live 
                       bacteria which have been attenuated (altered) to reduce the risk of 
                       infection.  It stimulates immune cells in the bladder to kill cancer 
                       cells 
                   •  It is used for non-muscle invasive cancers, which grow in the thin 
                       layer of cells lining the bladder but do not extend into the muscle of 
                       the bladder wall 
                   •  Treatment involves weekly instillations for 6 weeks (induction 
                       treatment), followed by maintenance treatments for up to three 
                       years 
                   •  Treatment reduces the chance of your bladder cancer returning 
                   •  Bladder tumours can recur during or after treatment, so follow-up 
                       bladder examinations (cystoscopies) are needed 
                   •  Like all powerful treatments, it comes with some significant side-
                       effects which you should balance against the risks of the bladder 
                       cancer itself 
                What does this procedure involve? 
                Instillation of an immunotherapy drug (BCG) into the bladder for aggressive 
                or frequently recurring non-muscle invasive cancer of the bladder. 
                 
                                                  
                 Published: October 2017                                             Leaflet No: 16/001  Page: 1 
                  Due for review: April 2020       © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                 
                To instil the BCG, we need to put a catheter (plastic tube) through your 
                urethra (waterpipe) into your bladder (pictured below). 
                What are the alternatives? 
                    •  Repeated cystoscopy – with electrical or laser cauterisation of any 
                        tumours found 
                    •  Intravesical chemotherapy – instillation of an anti-cancer drug 
                        (Mitomycin C or Epirubicin) into the bladder 
                    •  Surgical removal of the bladder (radical cystectomy) - with 
                        urinary diversion or bladder reconstruction 
                    •  Systemic chemotherapy – powerful anti-cancer drugs given by 
                        Oncologists as tablets and/or injections 
                What happens on the day of the procedure?  
                You should limit your fluid intake for 6 hours before each treatment.   
                On arrival in the clinic, we will ask you to pass urine and we will test it for 
                infection.  If testing suggests an infection, we will send a sample to the 
                laboratory and, depending on your symptoms, may postpone your BCG 
                treatment whilst you take a course of antibiotics. 
                If your urine is clear, your urologist (or a member of their team) will briefly 
                review your history and medications, and will discuss the procedure again 
                with you to confirm your consent. 
                You should allow up to three hours for your first treatment but, after that, 
                your treatments should take approximately 30 minutes. 
                Details of the procedure 
                    •  we clean your genital area with an antiseptic solution and squirt an 
                        antiseptic gel (containing local anaesthetic) into your urethra (water 
                        pipe) 
                    •  we pass a small catheter 
                        into your bladder 
                        (pictured right) 
                    •  we instil approximately 
                        half a cupful of the BCG 
                        preparation through the 
                        catheter 
                    •  we remove the catheter 
                        from your bladder 
                    •  we ask that you try not to pass urine for the next two hours, to allow 
                        the medication to treat the whole bladder lining 
                                                   
                 Published: October 2017                                              Leaflet No: 16/001  Page: 2 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                    •  on your first visit, we normally keep you in the clinic until you have 
                        passed urine but, for any remaining treatments, you may be allowed 
                        to leave after two hours and pass urine at home 
                    •  for up to 6 hours after the treatment, you should urinate while sitting 
                        to minimise the risk of splashing urine which contains live bacteria 
                    •  you should pour undiluted household bleach (equal to the amount of 
                        urine you pass) into your toilet, and leave this for 15 minutes before 
                        flushing the toilet  
                    •  you should drink plenty of fluids (two to three litres) for the first few 
                        days after the treatment 
                The first course of weekly treatments is called the induction course and 
                lasts for six weeks.  You will then start a program of maintenance 
                treatment lasting for one year.  This will involve a series of 3-weekly 
                instillations every three, six and 12 months with a cystoscopy before each 
                one.  After this, you may be advised to have further “top-up” treatments 
                every six months for up to three years. 
                 
                The main reasons for patients failing to complete the full course are side-
                effects (see below) or finding that the cancer has regrown in the bladder.   
                Are there any after-effects? 
                The possible after-effects and your risk of getting them are shown below.  
                Some are self-limiting or reversible, but others are not.  We have not listed 
                very rare after-effects (occurring in less than 1 in 250 patients) individually. 
                The impact of these after-effects can vary a lot from patient to patient; you 
                should ask your surgeon’s advice about the risks and their impact on you as 
                an individual: 
                 After-effect                                                               Risk 
                 Infection in your urine (this usually means                              Between 1 in 2 & 
                 that the next dose of BCG needs to be                                    1 in 10 patients 
                 postponed)                                                                Between 1 in 2 & 
                 Some bladder discomfort                                                  1 in 10 patients 
                 Flu-like symptoms which can last for two to                               Between 1 in 2 & 
                 three days                                                                1 in 10 patients 
                 
                                                   
                 Published: October 2017                                              Leaflet No: 16/001  Page: 3 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                  Urgently wanting to pass urine and needing                              Between 1 in 2 & 
                 to pass it more frequently (lasting for up to                            1 in 10 patients 
                 three days)                                                              
                 Failure to complete the course due to                                    Between 1 in 2 & 
                 discomfort in your bladder at the time of                                1 in 10 patients 
                 treatment                                                                 Between 1 in 2 & 
                 Blood in your urine                                                      1 in 10 patients 
                 Debris in your urine                                                      Between 1 in 2 & 
                 Stricture (narrowing) of the urethra                                      1 in 10 patients 
                 (waterpipe) following repeated use of a                                  Between 1 in 10 & 
                 catheter                                                                  1 in 50 patients 
                 Inflammation which can affect various                                    Between 1 in 10 & 
                 parts of the body (liver, joints and the back                            1 in 50 patients 
                 of your eye)                                                             
                 Persistent or severe pain after treatment                                Between 1 in 50 & 
                 (sometimes leading to removal of the                                     1 in 250 patients 
                 bladder)                                                                 
                 Generalised (and serious) infection with 
                 BCG bacteria needing treatment in hospital                               Between 1 in 50 & 
                 with powerful antibiotics.  This is not TB &                             1 in 250 patients 
                 there is no risk of catching TB from the                                 
                 treatment 
                What can I expect when I get home? 
                    •  We will send a copy of your treatment details to your GP 
                    •  any antibiotics or other tablets you may need will be arranged & 
                        dispensed, either from the hospital pharmacy or by your GP 
                    •  you should always wash your hands and your genitals every time you 
                        pass urine over the next few days (we suggest that you bring a wash 
                        bag with you every time you come to the hospital for treatment) 
                    •  it is best not to have sex for at least 24 hours after each treatment 
                        because this can be uncomfortable 
                 
                                                   
                 Published: October 2017                                              Leaflet No: 16/001  Page: 4 
                  Due for review: April 2020        © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                                    •  during a treatment course, and for one week afterwards, you should 
                                            use a condom during sex 
                                    •  if you are a smoker, you should try to stop because smoking can 
                                            encourage the return of bladder cancer (see below) 
                             If you think you have a urine infection (pain when passing urine, passing 
                             urine more frequently or foul-smelling urine), or if you develop a high 
                             temperature with backache, it is important to contact your GP and get 
                             treatment with antibiotics. 
                             General information about surgical procedures 
                             Before your procedure 
                             Please tell a member of the medical team if you have: 
                                    •  an implanted foreign body (stent, joint replacement, pacemaker, 
                                            heart valve, blood vessel graft); 
                                    •  a regular prescription for a blood thinning agent (warfarin, aspirin, 
                                            clopidogrel, rivaroxaban or dabigatran); 
                                    •  a present or previous MRSA infection; or 
                                    •  a high risk of variant-CJD (e.g. if you have had a corneal transplant, a 
                                            neurosurgical dural transplant or human growth hormone 
                                            treatment). 
                             Questions you may wish to ask 
                             If you wish to learn more about what will happen, you can find a list of 
                             suggested questions called "Having An Operation" on the website of the 
                             Royal College of Surgeons of England.  You may also wish to ask your 
                             surgeon for his/her personal results and experience with this procedure. 
                             Before you go home 
                             You will be given advice about what to look out for when you get home.  
                             Your surgeon or nurse will also give you details of who to contact, and how 
                             to contact them, in the event of problems. 
                             Smoking and surgery 
                             Since you are only having a local anaesthetic, stopping smoking will have no 
                             effect on the safety of the procedure itself.  Smoking can, however, cause 
                             cancers of the urinary tract, and can encourage existing cancers to recur or 
                             progress.  We strongly advise patients with bladder cancer to stop smoking.   
                             For advice on stopping, you can: 
                                    •  contact your GP; 
                                    •  access your local NHS Smoking Help Online; or 
                                    •  ring the free NHS Smoking Helpline on 0800 169 0 169. 
                                                                                             
                               Published: October 2017                                                                                                        Leaflet No: 16/001  Page: 5 
                               Due for review: April 2020                                      © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
                         
                        Driving after any procedure 
                        It is your responsibility to make sure you are fit to drive even after a minor 
                        surgical procedure.  You only need to contact the DVLA if your ability to 
                        drive is likely to be affected for more than three months.  If it is, you should 
                        check with your insurance company before driving again. 
                        What should I do with this information? 
                        Thank you for taking the trouble to read this information.  Please let your 
                        urologist (or specialist nurse) know if you would like to have a copy for 
                        your own records.  If you wish, the medical or nursing staff can also arrange 
                        to file a copy in your hospital notes. 
                        What sources have we used to prepare this leaflet? 
                        This leaflet uses information from consensus panels and other evidence-
                        based sources including: 
                              •  the Department of Health (England); 
                              •  the Cochrane Collaboration; and 
                              •  the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE).  
                        It also follows style guidelines from:  
                              •  the Royal National Institute for Blind People (RNIB); 
                              •  the Information Standard; 
                              •  the Patient Information Forum; and 
                              •  the Plain English Campaign. 
                        Disclaimer 
                        We have made every effort to give accurate information but there may still 
                        be errors or omissions in this leaflet.  BAUS cannot accept responsibility for 
                        any loss from action taken (or not taken) as a result of this information.  
                                                                                 PLEASE NOTE 
                              The staff at BAUS are not medically trained, and are unable to answer 
                             questions about the information provided in this leaflet.  If you do have 
                            any questions, you should contact your urologist, specialist nurse or GP. 
                         
                                                                            
                         Published: October 2017                                                                                Leaflet No: 16/001  Page: 6 
                          Due for review: April 2020                         © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
