                                          GENERAL SHOP SAFETY RULES 
                         
                                  To be observed by all students using room F212 Parkview 
                                                                               
                         
                        1.    Safety glasses, cover goggles, or face shields are required when in any shop area, 
                              whether working or not!! 
                        2.    Shoes must be worn in any shop area.  No one wearing sandals will be allowed to 
                              enter any shop area.  The minimum footwear must cover the entire foot. 
                        3.    Do not operate any item of equipment unless you are familiar with its operation and 
                              have been authorized to operate it.  If you have any questions regarding the use of 
                              equipment, ask the area supervisor. 
                        4.    No work may be performed using power tools unless at least two people are in the 
                              shop area and can see each other. 
                        5.    Avoid excessive use of compressed air to blow dirt or chips from machinery to 
                              avoid scattering chips. Never use compressed air guns to clean clothing, hair, or 
                              aim at another person. 
                        6.    In case of injury, no matter how slight, report it to the shop supervisor.  The 
                              campus emergency phone number is 9-911. 
                        7.    Do not attempt to remove foreign objects from the eye or body.  Report to the 
                              Sindecuse Health Center (387-3287) for medical treatment.  If chemicals get in the 
                              eye(s), wash eye(s) for 15 minutes in an open flow of water before proceeding for 
                              medical treatment.  
                                                      In severe cases, notify the Department of Public Safety at     
                              387-5555.
                        8. Machines must be shut off when cleaning, repairing, or oiling. 
                        9.    Do not wear ties, loose clothing, jewelry, gloves, etc. around moving or rotating 
                              machinery.  Long hair must be tied back or covered to keep it away from moving 
                              machinery.  Hand protection in the form of suitable gloves should be used for 
                              handling hot objects, glass, or sharp-edged items. 
                        10.  Wear appropriate clothing for the job (i.e., do not wear short sleeve shirts or short 
                              pants when welding). 
                        11.  Do not work in the shop if tired, or in a hurry.
                        12.  Never indulge in horseplay in the shop areas. 
                        13.  All machines must be operated with all required guards and shields in place. 
                        14.   A brush, hook, or special tool is preferred for removal of chips, shavings, etc. from 
                              the work area.  Never use the hands. 
                        15.   Keep fingers clear of the point of operation of machines by using special tools or 
                              devices, such as, push sticks, hooks, pliers, etc.  Never use a rag near moving 
                              machinery. 
                        16.   A hard hammer should not be used to strike a hardened tool or any machine part.  
                              Use a soft-faced hammer. 
                        17.   Practice cleanliness and orderliness in the shop areas. 
                        18.  Keep the floor around machines clean, dry, and free from trip hazards.  Do not 
                              allow chips to accumulate. 
                        19.  Think through the entire job before starting. 
                     20.   Before starting a machine, always check it for correct setup and always check to 
                           see if machine is clear by operating it manually, if possible. 
                     21.   Do not drink alcoholic beverages before or during work in the machine shop area.  
                           Do not bring food/snacks into the shop. 
                     22.   Don't rush or take chances.  Obey all safety rules. 
                     23.   If you have not worked with a particular material before, check the hazardous 
                           material safety data sheets (MSDS) book for any specific precautions to be taken 
                           while working with the material.   
                     24.  Follow all appropriate precautions when working with solvents, paints, adhesives, 
                           or other chemicals. Use appropriate protective equipment. 
                     25.  Safe procedures for most shop operations are described in the Health and Safety 
                           Procedures Notebook located by the safety cabinet. 
                     26.  Check the power cords and plugs on portable tools for damage or fray before using 
                           them. 
                     27.   Always store oily rags in an approved metal container. 
                      
                     Source: Based on and modified from 
                     http://www.me.ucsb.edu/course_pages/course_pages_w03/me12s/shop_safety_guideline 
                      
                      
