       
                               
                         INVOICE DOCUMENTATION CHECKLIST 
       
       The purpose of this document is to provide examples of acceptable supporting 
       documentation. This checklist is not an all-inclusive as fiscal staff may request 
       additional information. It is required to adequately document each expense with 
       sufficient detail to determine if the expense is allowable, reasonable and necessary.  
        
        
       Personal Services (salaries and wages) 
       Must be based on records that accurately reflect the work performed. Records must be 
       supported by a system of internal controls which provides reasonable assurance that the 
       charges are accurate, allowable, and properly allocated; be incorporated into the agency’s 
       records; reasonably reflect the total activity for which the employee is compensated; 
       encompass all activities compensated; comply with the established accounting policies and 
       practices of the entity; and support the distribution of the employee’s salary or wages 
       among specific activities or cost objective if the employee works on more than project. 
              Time Sheets (see example on page 4) 
              Detailed pay stubs (see example on page 5) 
              Entity’s documented personnel and accounting policies 
       
       
       
       Personal Services (fringe benefits) 
       Allowances and services provided by employers to their employees as compensation in 
       addition to regular salaries and wages. Fringe benefits include, but are not limited to, the 
       costs of leave (vacation, family related, sick or military), employee insurance, pensions, 
       and unemployment benefit plans. 
              Allocation plan for determining the fringe rate charged 
              Entity’s documented fringe policy 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
      Invoice Documentation Checklist 
      CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018                         Page 1 
       
      
      
      
     Supplies and Operating 
           Itemized invoices and/or receipts for each expense 
           If expense is allocated to more than one project, entity’s documented allocation 
             methodology 
           Funded entity hosted meeting or conference expenses 
              o  Agenda 
              o  Purpose of meeting or conference 
              o  Meeting minutes or notes
             o  Attendees and affiliated organizations 
             o  Date of meeting 
             o  Invoices and/or detailed receipts for meeting materials, speaker fees, 
               allowable food and venue expenses 
          Entity’s documented purchasing policy 
           
          *Food and beverage expenses for staff meetings or individual project staff are 
          unallowable.  
           
          Funded entity provided training or classes (DPP classes, First Aid Courses) 
             o  Purpose for training opportunity 
             o  Attendees and affiliated organizations 
             o  Date(s) of service 
             o  Attendee signed or initialed sign-in sheets with date of service 
             o  Detailed agreement with venue location 
             o  Detailed facilitator or speaker invoices 
          Entity’s documented purchasing policy 
    
          Funded entity attended training or conference 
             o  Purpose for training opportunity 
             o  Date(s) of service 
             o  Receipt for payment of training or conference 
             o  Agenda 
          Entity’s documented purchasing policy 
    
    
     Invoice Documentation Checklist 
     CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018         Page 2 
      
    
    
    Travel 
         Detailed travel expense form to include: 
             o Google (or other) maps 
             o Explanation / purpose of travel 
             o Date of travel 
             o Address of starting and ending points 
             o Detailed receipts for travel related expenses (e.g. gas, hotel, rental car) 
             o Mileage log (fleet vehicle) 
             o Meeting or conference agenda 
           Entity’s documented travel policy 
     
    Other Costs 
          Itemized invoices and/or receipts 
          If expense is allocated to more than one project, entity’s documented allocation 
           methodology 
          Entity’s documented policy 
    
    
    Contractual Payments 
          Detailed sub-contractor invoices 
          Detailed receipts for expenses  
          MOU or executed agreement between entities to include: 
             o  Dates of engagement 
             o  Subrecipient or contractor determination 
             o  Scope of work, budget and or deliverables 
          Entity’s documented policy for subrecipient/subcontract monitoring 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 3 
    
    
    Indirect 
    If your entity has a negotiated indirect rate through a federal cognizant agency the approved 
    indirect cost rate must be on file with CDPHE Internal Audit Unit. 
     
    If you do not receive funds directly from a federal agency, CDPHE Internal Audit Unit will 
    negotiate a rate with your entity. CDPHE only negotiates and approves submitted written indirect 
    cost agreements with organizations that receive funds as a subrecipient from CDPHE. 
    If you elect to use the de minimis indirect cost rate, costs must be consistently charged as 
    either indirect or direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. 
    If chosen, this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until 
    such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate for a rate, which the non-Federal entity 
    may apply to do at any time. 
    If using the de minimis rate, 10% of modified total direct costs, documentation may be   
    requested to support rate claimed. The de minimis indirect cost rate is only available to 
    organizations that have never had a negotiated indirect cost rate. 
     
    *CDPHE requires all indirect rates to comply with generally accepted accounting principles and be 
    fully supported by actual cost data. 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 4 
    
     
    Personal Services (salaries and fringe) Expenses 
    Must be based on records that accurately reflect the work performed. Records must be supported 
    by a system of internal controls which provides reasonable assurance that the charges are 
    accurate, allowable, and properly allocated; be incorporated into the agency’s records; reasonably 
    reflect the total activity for which the employee is compensated; encompass all activities 
    compensated; comply with the established accounting policies and practices of the entity; and 
    support the distribution of the employee’s salary or wages among specific activities or cost 
    objective if the employee works on more than project. 
    Figure A lists 100% of the employee’s actual time spent working and adequately documents how 
    the percentages were calculated.  In this example an employee enters their time in the lower 
    table, listing the hours worked on each grant.  A description of the work completed can be 
    entered in the “work” column. The total of hours worked each day is calculated in the last column 
    labeled “total”.  The last row totals each of the Grant columns and lists total hours worked during 
    the pay period where the total row and total column meet. 
    This time and effort report allows the supervisor and employee to sign the time and effort report. 
    Although not mandatory, a certification statement on the time sheet certifying employee hours is 
    best practice.  
    
   Figure A 
                                                   
       
     
       
       
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 5 
    
    
    
    Personal Services (salaries and fringe) Expenses 
    The amount of time documented on the timesheet in Figure A should correspond to the Paystub 
    shown in Figure B below. 
    Fringe benefit expenses are allowances and services provided by employers to their employees as 
    compensation in addition to regular salaries and wages. Fringe benefits are employer paid portions 
    only and may include, but are not limited to, the costs of leave (vacation, family related, sick or 
    military), employee insurance, pensions, and unemployment benefit plans. The bottom of the 
    paystub in Figure B lists the employer paid contributions.  
   Figure B 
                                                 
       
       
       
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 6 
    
       
    Supplies and Operating Expenses 
    An itemized receipt for a purchase needs to be included in the supporting documentation.   
    This is acceptable documentation because it contains the following:  
       a. date  
       b. price per item 
       c. description of items purchased 
       d. total of purchase 
       e. shipping and billing information 
        
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 7 
    
    
    
    
    Supplies and Operating Expenses 
    
    This is unacceptable documentation because it lacks the following detail:  
       a. date  
       b. price per item 
       c. description of items purchased 
       d. name of entity purchased from 
       e. name of person purchasing items 
        
    
    
                        
    
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 8 
    
     
     
    Allocating Expenses 
    Per the OMB Super Circular 2 CFR 200, Section 200.405, if a cost benefits two or more projects or 
    activities in proportions that can be determined without undue effort or cost, the cost must be 
    allocated to the projects based on the proportional benefit.  
    Direct costs are those costs that can be easily identified to a specific cost objective or award.  
      o  Direct costs may be allocated based on a line by line allocation or a bottom line allocation.  
        Line by line relies on actual rate of usage of each cost for example rent expense based on 
        square footage used by each program and phone by number of phones each program uses.    
         
      o  At a rate by which all costs are distributed proportionately.  May be by FTE or square 
        footage, in example below the expense has been allocated based on a predefined rate if 
        using the first option or they could charge the program receiving each headphone directly.  
    
    The circular further states that if a cost benefits two or more projects or activities in proportions 
    that cannot be determined, the costs may be allocated with any reasonable documented basis. 
    
    
                                                     
    
    
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 9 
    
      Supplies and Operating Expenses 
      Examples of costs an entity may allocate include, but are not limited to:  
      In the example below, the entity runs 5 programs and has determined the square footage 
      each program occupies and has used the percentage of square feet to calculate the amount 
      of rent expense each program will incur.  
       
      Rent $4,920.83 
                                               Square                 
                Program                       Footage        %            Rent 
              A                                   350           35%      $ 1,722.29 
              B                                   200           20%      $    984.17 
              C                                   150           15%      $    738.12 
              D                                   125           13%      $    615.10 
              E                                   175           18%      $    861.15 
              Total                              1000          100%      $ 4,920.83 
       
       
       
      In this example below, the entity has 8 programs and allocated the phone expense by the 
      FTE for each of the programs.  The percentage of FTE has been used to calculate the phone 
      expense each program will incur.  
       
      Phone 
                                                                                                 
      Allocated by FTE 
               Program                FTE                    %           Phone 
              A                                     7           18%        $    96.44 
              B                                     4           11%       $    55.11 
              C                                     2            5%       $    27.56 
              D                                     1            3%       $    13.78 
              E                                     5           13%       $    68.89 
              F                                    13           34%       $  179.11 
              G                                     2            5%       $    27.56 
              H                                     4           11%       $    55.11 
              Total                                38          100%         523.55 
      
      
     Invoice Documentation Checklist 
     CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018                                               Page 10 
      
    
    
    
    
    
    Travel Expenses 
    
                                                         
    
    The travel reimbursement form should have a place for employee signature, supervisor 
    signature (or approving official), list type of expense, and be maintained in accordance with 
    entity policy. Travel expenses should correspond with the time and effort documentation. 
     
    
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 11 
    
     
     
     
    Travel Expense (Continued) 
    
                                                      
    
    The travel reimbursement form shall list the purpose of the trip and the starting and ending 
    mileage. 
     
    Additional documentation to support travel expenses may include:  
     
         o  Maps (to support mileage claimed) 
         o  Hotel Receipts 
         o  Rental car receipts  
          o  Fleet vehicle logs 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 12 
    
    Other Costs and Contractual Expenses 
    OMB Super Circular 2 CFR 200, Section 200.331 requires all pass through entities to monitor the 
    activities of the subrecipient as necessary to ensure that the subaward is used for authorized 
    purposes, in compliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the 
    subaward, and that subaward performance goals are achieved. 
        
    Noteworthy: 
      o  Oversight includes (from the business dictionary) “contract implementation, measurement of 
        work completed, and computation of payments. It also includes monitoring contract 
        relationship, addressing related problems, incorporating necessary changes or modifications 
        in the contract, ensuring both parties meet or exceed each other's expectations, and actively 
        interacting with the contractor to achieve the contract's objective(s). Also called contract 
        administration.” 
      o  Subrecipient personnel shall identify whose responsibility it is to monitor progress of 
        contractors hired. Subrecipient’s personnel shall inspect contractor’s deliverables before 
        official acceptance of the good/service to ensure fulfillment of contract requirements. 
        Progress reports should be required of the contractor who reports on the agreed-upon 
        milestones. 
      o  Subrecipient should review and confirm all invoicing by the contractor before payment is 
        made.  
      o  Costs included in the invoice MUST be reasonable, allowable, and in compliance with the 
        contracts terms.  
         
    For additional guidance, see Uniform Guidance Subpart E – Cost Principles § 200.400 to 475. 
     
    Definitions 
    Pass‐Through Entity (PTE). A Recipient that provides a Subaward to one or more Subrecipients to 
    carry out part of a federal program. Where the State is the Recipient of a Federal Award that will be 
    subsequently awarded to one or more Subrecipients, the PTE for purposes of the OMB Uniform 
    Guidance shall be the specific State Agency program that administers and monitors the Subawards. 
    (See 2 CFR §200.74)  
     
    Award: An award of funds by a State Agency or a federal awarding agency or by a recipient of an 
    award of State or federal funds Subawards.  
     
    Recipient. A non‐Federal entity that receives a Federal Award directly from a federal awarding 
    agency to carry out an activity under a federal program. The term does not include a 
    Subrecipient. (See 2 CFR §200.86). 
     
    Subaward. An Award of federal funds provided by a PTE to a Subrecipient for the Subrecipient to 
    carry out part of a Federal Award received by the PTE. A Subaward does not include payments to a 
    Contractor or payments to an individual that is a beneficiary of a federal program. (See 2 CFR 
    §200.92). 
     
   Invoice Documentation Checklist 
   CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018              Page 13 
    
         Subrecipient. A non‐federal entity that receives a Subaward from a Recipient to carry out part of a 
         federal program, not including an individual beneficiary of such program. A Subrecipient may also 
         be a Recipient of other Federal Awards directly from a federal awarding agency. (See 2 
         CFR §200.93). 
          
                           •Federal Awarding Agency
          Federal Agency   •Grants Money
                           •State Pass Through Entity
           State Agency    •Receives money from Federal Agency
                           •Also know as Non-Federal Entity, Grantee, Recipient
                           •Subrecipient (Local Government, Nonprofit, Private Entity)
                           •Receives money from the State
           Subrecipient    •Also know as Non-Federal Entity, Subgrantee
                                                                                                             
       Invoice Documentation Checklist 
       CDPHE Internal Audit, v.2 February 2018                                                                              Page 14 
        
