            Foreword   
            Science education in the elementary school is crucial 
            to the education of our children. Hands-on science 
            activities encourage students to become active 
            participants in learning about the world around them. 
            This booklet is designed to assist elementary science 
            teachers with one of the special aspects of teaching 
            science—creating a safe experimental environment for 
            students.  
            A special note of acknowledgement to members of 
            the American Chemical Society (ACS) Committee on 
            Chemical Safety who prepared the ifrst edition of this 
            manual in 1993: Jack Breazeale; who chaired the 
            Subcommittee; Robert Alaimo; Patricia Redden; Jay 
            Young; Maureen Matkovich, ACS staff liaison; and, 
            especially, Beverly DiMaio of the Horry County School 
            District in South Carolina.
            This third edition contains several additions and updated 
            references and graphics. This edition was revised and 
            edited by Bettyann Howson, Task Force chair; David 
            Crumrine; David Katz; Robert Hill; Patricia Galvan, ACS 
            Ofifce of K–8 Education; and Marta Gmurczyk, ACS staff 
            liaison. Their contributions to this edition are gratefully 
            acknowledged.
                           Laurence doemeny, Chair
                         Committee on Chemical Safety
                                 February 2011
        1
             Disclaimer: The information contained in this booklet is derived from 
             recognized authorities considered to be reliable and representative 
             of the best opinions on the subject. This booklet is intended to serve 
             only as a starting point for good practices and does not purport to 
             specify minimal legal standards or to represent the policy of the 
             ACS. No warranty, guarantee, or representation is made by the 
             ACS about the accuracy or sufifciency of the information contained 
             herein, and the ACS assumes no responsibility in connection to this 
             material. This booklet is intended to provide basic guidelines for safe 
             practices. Therefore, it cannot be assumed that all necessary warning 
             and precautionary measures are contained in this document and 
             that additional information or measures may not be required. The 
             ACS does not guarantee that the recommendations contained in 
             booklet meet or comply with the requirements of any safety code or 
             regulation of any state, municipality, or other jurisdiction. Users of 
             this booklet should consult pertinent local, state, and federal laws and 
             legal counsel before initiating any K-8 school science safety program.
                                             2
              SaFety in the eLementary 
              SCienCe CLaSSroom
              introduCtion
              Science activities in the elementary classroom are 
              safe provided that you and your students are aware of 
              potential hazards and take all necessary and appropriate 
              precautions. By modeling safe lab practices and 
              instructing your students to do the same, they will 
              not only avoid injury now but they will also be better 
              prepared for lab experiences in their upper level science 
              classes.
              The safety measures described in this booklet have 
              been compiled by scientists whose area of expertise is 
              chemical safety. The purpose of this booklet is 
              to help you achieve the following:
                •  Prevent accidents and injuries 
                  that may occur during science 
                  activities and experiments;
                •  Teach your students that safety 
                  is an important part of science;
                •  Gain awareness of the 
                  potential hazards that 
                  exist in an elementary 
                  science classroom; 
                  and
                •  Identify safe lab 
                  practices that 
                  students should 
          3       know and follow.
           These scientists recognize that they are not the only 
           source of classroom safety information. You may consult 
           your science textbooks or kit programs, state department 
           of education, science supply companies that serve K–12 
           schools, or the National Science Teachers Association for 
           additional safety information. Science faculties at nearby 
           colleges and universities are often willing to assist in 
           safety matters, as well.
           take time to PLan
           Many potential hazards can be eliminated if you are 
           organized and prepared. The key is to become familiar 
           with the procedures and substances used in hands-on 
           activities so that you will know what to expect. Always 
           perform activities and experiments before assigning 
           them to students and, while practicing the experiment, 
           consider the following:
            •  Identify the materials you will need and how you 
              will distribute them to students;
            •  Identify safety issues and plan how you will 
              address these with students;
            •  Consider how you will instruct students as they 
              conduct the activity;
            •  Consider possible emergencies and plan how you 
              will handle them should they occur;
            •  Ensure that the necessary equipment and 
              emergency supplies are readily available and that 
              you know how to use them;
            •  Plan how you will collect materials and safely 
              dispose of waste after the activity; and
                                      4
            •  Plan to have students wash their hands after 
              completing a lesson that includes an experiment or 
              activity.
           Follow only reputable published procedures when 
           mixing or using chemicals. All activities published by 
           the ACS, for use at the elementary school level, go 
           through a safety-review process. If you would like to use 
           or combine chemicals on your own, ifnd out whether 
           or not the activity you are planning is safe to perform 
           in a classroom setting. Consult a high school science 
           teacher, science supervisor, or a science professional to 
           learn about any potential problems. Feel free to contact 
           the ACS Education Division at education@acs.org with 
           questions about the safety of a planned science activity 
           in your classroom.
       5
            Grab your GoGGLeS and Gear
            You, your students, and any visitors to the classroom 
            should wear goggles whenever you conduct or observe 
            hands-on activities. You may ifnd that you need to 
            remind students that goggles work only if they cover 
            a student’s eyes, not their forehead or neck! However, 
            wearing goggles is just one way to protect your eyes 
            when conducting science activities or experiments. 
            Consider the following to ensure that you and your 
            students are properly protected during science activities:                                                                 
             •  Wear properly iftting splash-proof safety goggles 
               when working with chemicals or observing others 
               who are working with chemicals. Both child and 
               adult-sized goggles are available from the American 
               Chemical Society at www.acs.org/store, as well as 
               from a variety of K–12 science suppliers;
             •  Always wear splash-proof safety goggles when 
               working with, or observing, students who are using 
               chemicals, hot liquids, or lfying objects;
                                         6
              •  Wear a laboratory apron or art smock made of 
                cotton, if there is a chance of soiling or damaging 
                clothing;
              •  Use gloves, heat or cold-resistant mitts, or other hand 
                protection when working with hot materials, dry ice, 
                noxious plants, or live animals;
              •  Tie back long hair and secure loose clothing and 
                dangling jewelry, especially when working with 
                chemicals or heat sources; and
              •  Remind students to keep science materials away 
                from their mouths, noses, or eyes when conducting 
                or cleaning after an activity or experiment.
            CheCk your SCienCe equiPment
            ChemiCaLS
              •  You will ifnd that most K–6 science activity 
                procedures call for household chemicals. Before 
                using these, study the product label carefully to 
                learn the hazards and warnings.
              •  When using a chemical purchased from a science 
                supply company that serves K–12 schools, check 
                the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). This 
                document describes the hazards of using the 
                chemical, along with proper storage and disposal 
                information.
              •  Always store chemicals and solutions in properly 
                labeled containers meant for holding chemicals 
                and solutions. Never store chemicals in containers 
                that were originally used for food.
        7
                             •  Be sure to dispose of chemicals properly. If you 
                                 have any questions about how to do this, consult 
                                 the MSDS or your science supervisor. Regulations 
                                 vary, so it is best to contact local experts.
                             •  Keep the MSDS handy when using a chemical. If a 
                                 student is injured as a result of coming into contact 
                                 with the chemical, the MSDS will explain what 
                                 to do. Be sure to send the injured student to the 
                                 nurse’s ofifce along with the MSDS. Every MSDS 
                                 should be on ifle in the school district ofifce, as 
                                 well as in the school or science department ofifce. 
                                 Copies should be available for the classroom.
                             •  Always wear cotton or insulated gloves, such as 
                                 gardening or work gloves, when handling dry ice. 
                                 This solid carbon dioxide is extremely cold and 
                                 can damage bare skin.
                             •  Store dry ice in a container, such as an open 
                                 cooler or cardboard box, so that carbon dioxide 
                                 gas can escape. If placed in a sealed container 
                                 the gas pressure will build and may cause the 
                                 container to explode.
                          tooLS
                             •  Keep the use of glass to a minimum by using 
                                 it only when necessary. Plastic nonbreakable 
                                 containers are often a ifne substitute.
                             •  Cuts are among the most common of all laboratory 
                                 injuries. Take proper precautions when using sharp 
                                 objects, such as knives, scalpels, compasses with 
                                 sharp points, wires, needles, or pins. Carefully 
                                 consider whether cutting or sharp tools are really 
                                 needed. If necessary, tools that have retractable         8
                  blades are recommended. Precutting materials 
                  will eliminate the need for students to handle 
                  cutting tools. If students must use sharp objects, 
                  demonstrate how students should safely handle 
                  these items to prevent injury.
                •  Store batteries with at least one terminal covered 
                  with tape. Batteries with any signs of corrosion 
                  should be discarded according to school policy or 
                  local disposal regulations. Because the contents 
                  of batteries are potentially hazardous, do not cut 
                  batteries open or take them apart.
                •  Old batteries should not be thrown away with 
                  the regular classroom trash. Instead, dispose of 
                  these, with one terminal covered with tape, in the 
                  community hazardous waste recycling collection.
                •  To minimize environmental impact consider using 
                  rechargeable batteries.
              thermometerS
                •  Use alcohol thermometers instead of traditional 
                  mercury thermometers. Mercury from broken 
                  thermometers is dififcult to clean up and the vapor 
                  from spilled mercury is dangerous and toxic for 
                  the environment.
                •  Thermometers with plastic or metal backing are 
                  best. If using glass thermometers without this 
                  support, they should be equipped with a cap or 
                  triangular ring to prevent rolling.
                •  Students must not use the thermometers as stirring 
                  rods.
          9
             think beFore you brinG PLantS 
             & animaLS into your 
             CLaSSroom 
             PLantS
              •  Never place seeds or plants used in science 
                activities in your mouth.
              •  Always wash hands after working with seeds and 
                plants.
              •  Many store-bought seeds have been coated with 
                insecticides, fertilizers, or both.
              •  Approximately 700 species of plants are known 
                to cause illness or death. Learn about plants in 
                your area that are harmful and be sure to avoid 
                contact with these. Contact your local agricultural 
                extension ofifce to learn more.
              •  When taking students on trips into areas where 
                they may be exposed to hazardous plants, such 
                as poison ivy, be prepared to instruct students to 
                recognize and avoid these plants.
              •  Learn the signs of the plant poisoning so that you 
                can act quickly if a student exhibits such signs 
                after a lesson. Symptoms may include one or more 
                of the following: headache, nausea, dizziness, 
                vomiting, hives, itching, or other skin irritation.
                                            10
           Live animaLS
            •  Give students a 
              safety lesson 
              to show them 
              how to properly 
              care for and treat 
              an animal before 
              bringing it into a 
              classroom.
            •  Students should handle 
              animals voluntarily and only under 
              your close supervision.
            •  Students must not mishandle or mistreat animals.
            •  Animals caught in the wild have no place in 
              your classroom. Wild animals may have serious 
              diseases, such as rabies or may carry infectious 
              diseases, that are dangerous to people. For 
              example, turtles may carry salmonella.
           diSSeCtion
            •  Only dissect animals that have been purchased 
              from a science supplier to K–12 schools 
              speciifcally for this purpose. Never dissect any 
              other animal corpse.
            •  Do not use any animal body that has been 
              preserved in formaldehyde.
       11
                 Prevent burnS and FireS
                 heatinG materiaLS
                   •  The area surrounding a heat source should be clean 
                     and have no combustible materials nearby.
                   •  Students should not work with hot materials, such as 
                     very hot water.
                   •  Not all glass can handle the stress of being heated. 
                     Do not use household glass. Use only borosilicate 
                                            ™ or Pyrex™ 
                     laboratory glassware, such as Kimax
                     when heating substances.
                   •  Common household liquids, such as alcohol or oil, 
                     are lfammable and should not be heated. Heat only 
                     water or water solutions.
                   •  Never use alcohol burners.
                   •  Handle all hot materials using the appropriate type of 
                     tongs.
                 hot PLateS
                   •  Use only laboratory type hot plates. These are sealed 
                     against minor spills.
                   •  Place the hot plate in a location where a student 
                     cannot pull it off the worktop or trip over the power 
                     cord.
                   •  Never leave the room while the hot plate is plugged 
                     in, whether or not it is in use.
                   •  Keep students away from hot plates that are in use or 
                     still hot, unless you are right beside the students and 
                     have given them speciifc instructions.
                                                           12
            •  Before handling a hot plate, make sure that it is both 
              unplugged and cool. You can check to see if a hot 
              plate is still too hot by placing a few drops of water on 
              the surface. If the water does not evaporate, it should 
              be cool enough to touch.
           Fire
           Use only safety matches. But even with these, handle and 
           use matches yourself. If you decide that students them-
           selves must use matches as part of a science activity or 
           experiment, provide explicit instructions on how to safely 
           use them and only permit students to use them under 
           your direct supervision.
           Students should use candles only under your strict super-
           vision. Use tea candles that are short and wide, and can-
           not be knocked over in normal use. Place other candles 
           in a “drip pan,” such as an aluminum pie plate, that is 
           large enough to contain the candle if it is knocked over.
            •  Never leave the room while a lfame is lit or other 
              heat source is in use.
            •  Know the location of the nearest ifre extinguisher 
              and make sure you are trained in how to use it.
            •  Check your school’s policy about what to do in the 
              event of a ifre.
            •  Know the location of the nearest ifre alarm. Have 
              a map by the door of the classroom illustrating its 
              location.
       13
             CLean uP broken GLaSS and 
             SPiLLS
               •  Clean up broken glass by using a broom and 
                 dustpan. Do not touch, and do not allow students 
                 to touch, broken glass. Dispose of the glass in a 
                 separate container and label it to inform others 
                 that it contains broken glass.
               •  Clean up any spill immediately, especially a liquid 
                 spill. This will prevent further contamination of the 
                 work area and the possibility of slipping, falling, or 
                 tracking the chemical to another location.
               •  When using household or other chemicals, follow 
                 the clean-up instructions on the label or the 
                 MSDS.
               •  Throw all paper towels or other clean-up materials 
                 in a separate container for chemical wastes. 
                 Do not put chemical waste in the normal trash 
                 containers.
             eStabLiSh emerGenCy 
             ProCedureS
               •  Talk with other science teachers and your principal 
                 to develop and establish emergency procedures for 
                 ifrst-aid, electric shock, poisoning, burns, allergic 
                 reactions, ifre, evacuations, spills, or animal bites.
               •  Find contact information and keep it handy, so that 
                 you can contact the appropriate authorities and 
                 response agencies, in the event of an emergency.
                                             14
           Student SaFety ruLeS
           Introduce safe practices and help your students under-
           stand why and how these practices are used. You may 
           either set the rules or have students help you develop 
           science safety rules. Either way, make sure students 
           understand these rules and why they are necessary. You 
           may choose to have students create posters for display 
           in the room throughout the year to emphasize safety and 
           remind students of the speciifc safety rules. Review the 
           following safety rules with your students before begin-
           ning an activity.
            •  Always get your teacher’s approval before 
              conducting a science activity and be sure to have 
              your teacher supervise whenever you conduct a 
              science activity. Never experiment on your own.
            •  Always wear safety goggles when your teacher 
              tells you to do so. Do not remove your goggles 
              until your teacher says that it is OK.
            •  If instructed to do so, wear an apron or smock to 
              protect your clothing.
            •  Read and follow all warning labels on substances 
              being used.
            •  Be sure your teacher is aware of any allergies you 
              may have.
            •  Carefully follow all instructions when conducting 
              a science activity. Be sure to use substances 
              exactly as described in the activity.
       15
            •  Keep all materials used in the science activity 
              away from your mouth, nose, and eyes. Do not 
              place your hands on your face when conducting 
              or cleaning after an activity.
            •  Never taste anything during a science activity. If an 
              investigation involves tasting, it will be done in the 
              cafeteria.
            •  Tie back long hair, and secure loose clothing and 
              dangling jewelry.
            •  Know the location of all safety equipment, such as 
              the goggle cabinet, ifre blanket, ifrst-aid kit, and so 
              forth, in or near your classroom.
            •  Safety equipment must remain in good working 
              condition. Do not play with it.
            •  Tell your teacher immediately if an injury, spill, or 
              other accident occurs.
            •  Clean up your work area after 
              conducting a science activity.
            •  Wash your hands with soap and 
              water after completing a science 
              activity.
                                     16
           Even very young students must follow safety rules and 
           have a sense of whether or not a behavior will be safe. 
           Make it clear that students who do not follow these rules 
           will lose the privilege of taking part in fun, hands-on 
           activities. For the safety of all, misbehaving students must 
           be removed from the area where hands-on activities are 
           being conducted.
           As students continue to learn about the importance 
           of science safety throughout their elementary school 
           years, they will transfer these skills beyond the science 
           classroom to other classes, to the science lab in middle 
           and high school, and to life in general.
            
       17
            reSourCeS
            american Chemical Society
            Education Division
            1155 Sixteenth St., NW 
            Washington, DC 20036 
            800-227-5558 
            www.acs.org
            american Chemical Society
            Committee on Chemical Safety
            1155 Sixteenth St., NW 
            Washington, DC 20036 
            www.acs.org/safety
            national association of biology teachers
            12030 Sunrise Valley Drive 
            Suite 110 
            Reston, VA 20191 
            703-264-9696 
            www.NABT.org
            national Science teachers association
            1840 Wilson Blvd. 
            Arlington, VA 22201 
            703-243-7100 
            www.NSTA.org
            Laboratory Safety 
                    institute
            192 Worcester Road 
            Natick, MA 01760 
            508-647-1900 
            www.labsafety.org
                                         18
              reCommendationS For 
              CLeaninG Shared GoGGLeS
              american Chemical Society
              Joint Board-Council Committee on Chemical Safety 
              May 1, 2009
              introduCtion
              Chemical safety goggles are often a shared commodity 
              in secondary schools and in various programs such as 
              the American Chemical Society’s kids & Chemistry and 
              national Chemistry week activities. Teachers and parents 
              of children participating in school and other chemistry-
              related activities may be concerned with disease 
              transmission associated with the reuse of protective 
              chemical goggles.
              The Safe Practices Subcommittee of the American 
              Chemical Society’s Committee on Chemical Safety (CCS) 
              was tasked to investigate and make recommendations 
              regarding cleaning goggles for reuse.
              The successful transmission of disease requires a number 
              of factors to occur simultaneously:
                1.  The presence of a pathogen that is virulent enough 
                  to cause disease;
                2.  The concentration of the pathogen must be high 
                  enough to cause an infectious dose;
                3.  There must be a transmission method from the 
                  environment to the host;
                4.  The pathogen must enter the correct portal to the 
                  host;
         19     5.  The host must be susceptible to the disease 
                  pathogen; and
                6.  The pathogen must be “strong” enough to 
                  overcome environmental stressors so as to remain 
                  active.
              The ifrst ifve points above are sometimes referred to as 
              the “chain of infection.” The absence of any of these 
              factors will prevent an infection. The iffth edition of 
              the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)/
              National Institutes of Health (NIH)’s Biosafety in 
              Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories states:
                 “To  accomplish  successful  transmission  [of 
                 disease] from an environmental source, all of 
                 these requirements for the “chain of infection” 
                 must  be  present.  The  absence  of  any  one 
                 element will prevent transmission...  Reduction 
                 of  environmental  microbial  contamination 
                 by  conventional  cleaning  methods  is  often 
                 enough to prevent environmentally mediated 
                 transmission.”
              reCommendation:
              After use, shared goggles, including the straps should 
              be thoroughly washed in warm water containing a 
              high-quality dishwashing detergent, thoroughly rinsed 
              with fresh water and allowed to dry before the next 
              use. This procedure should be sufifcient to prevent 
              environmentally transmitted disease.
              According to the CDC, the washing protocol should 
              provide adequate protection against common head 
              lice (Pediculus). More information on preventing the 
              transmission of head lice may be found at: http://www.
              cdc.gov/lice/head/prevent.html [accessed April 25, 2009].
                                                 20
           reFerenCe:
           U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
           Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and 
           Prevention/National Institutes of Health. Biosafety in 
           Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, 5th ed. 
           2007, Appendix B. This reference is available online at: 
           http://www.cdc.gov/OD/ohs/biosfty/bmbl5/bmbl5toc.htm 
           [accessed April 25, 2009].
       21
             Committee on Chemical Safety
              American Chemical Society
               1155 Sixteenth St. NW
               Washington DC 20036
                www.acs.org/safety 
              Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society
