   Scamproof your savings
      Pension scams. Don’t get stung.
              Pension scams: the facts
              Pensions are changing. From April 2015, if you are 
              over 55 years old, you can access your pension 
              savings in new ways. 
              Scammers are after your pension pot. They will try 
              to lure you with promises of one-off investments, 
              pension loans or upfront cash. Most of these are 
              bogus. 
              If you’re under age 55, you cannot release your 
              pension unless you are too ill to work. Read the 
              checklist on the next page to get to know the 
              hallmarks of a scam.
              If you’re over 55, you can release funds from 
              your pension from April 2015. You may still be 
              at risk from scammers. Make sure you use the 
              government’s Pension Wise service to understand 
              your options. You might also want to speak to 
              an adviser who is authorised by the Financial 
              Conduct Authority (FCA) before making any 
              decisions that could affect the rest of your life. 
              See the back of this booklet for useful links and 
              contacts. 
              By following the tips in this guide, you are giving 
              yourself the best possible protection against 
              scammers. Arm yourself with the facts and 
              stop a lifetime’s savings being lost. 
                                                                                          Pension scams Help for individuals    2
                    How to spot the warning signs
                    Some of the most common tactics used by scammers to trick you out of your savings 
                        A cold call, text message,                                     Convincing marketing 
                        website pop-up or                                              materials that promise you 
                                                                                       returns of over 8% on your 
                        someone coming to your                                         investment
                        door offering you a ‘free 
                        pension review’, ‘one-off 
                        investment opportunity’                                    Paperwork delivered 
                        or ‘legal loophole’                                        to your door by 
                                                                                   courier that requires 
                                                                                   immediate signature
                        Pension                                               A proposal to put your money 
                         access                                               in a single investment. In most 
                      before age          Overseas 
                                          transfer of                         circumstances, ifnancial advisers will 
                         55               the funds                           suggest diversiifcation of assets.
              Scammers don’t care whether you’re an inexperienced investor or have never put your money 
              anywhere other than a bank. They will try to lfatter, tempt and pressure you into transferring your 
              pension fund into an investment with attractive sounding returns. Once you’ve signed the forms 
              and the transfer has gone through, it’s too late. You’ll probably lose all your savings and end up 
              with nothing but a hefty tax bill. Remember, the only people who beneift from scams are the 
              scammers themselves.
              What can I do with my pension pot?
                Under age 55                                               Age 55 or older*
                û You can’t release or ‘cash in’ your pension            üYou can use your pension to buy a regular 
                    (unless you are too ill to work)                          income for the rest of your life (an ‘annuity’)
               ü You can transfer your pension from one                  üYou can use your pension to provide a 
                    regulated scheme to another                               lfexible retirement income (‘lfexi-access 
                                                                              drawdown’)
                                                                         üYou can take your pension as cash in stages
                                                                         üYou can take the whole pot as cash in one go
                                    There may be tax implications for how you access your savings
              *from April 2015
                                                                                          Pension scams Help for individuals    3
                                          Oliver’s story
                                          Tricked into being part of the scam
                                          Age: 45 
                                          Length of time in company pension: 15 years 
                                          Investment offer: overseas property developments 
              Oliver is cold called by someone who says his name is Paul, a ifnancial 
              adviser authorised by the government. He asks if Oliver is interested in 
              making the money in his pension pot work harder – as well as releasing 
              some funds for Oliver to spend as he likes.  
               
              Paul says he could get Oliver an initial cash back bonus of 30% of the 
              value of his pension pot, and a much better return on his money – 
              around 8%. All he needs to do is sign a document saying he wants to 
              transfer his pension into another scheme, and the money will then get 
              invested in a hotel complex in an up-and-coming area of Spain. 
              Paul tells him that if he agrees to be ‘locked in’ to the investment for 10 
              years, he will get an annual cash back payment of £1,000. Oliver is keen 
              to make the most of his money – he’s heard that he’ll be able to do what 
              he wants with his savings when he’s 55, so thinks this could be a good 
              solution to beating the current low interest rates that mean his pension 
              pot isn’t growing as quickly as he’d like. 
              Oliver’s a bit concerned that it sounds too good to be true, but Paul 
              reassures him. He says he understands there are lots of crooks out there 
              but he’s government registered. He promises to send Oliver some 
              marketing material and encourages him to check out the website. He 
              tells Oliver that there are only a few opportunities left and that it’s a 
              time-limited offer, so if he wants to make the most of it, he should act 
              quickly. 
              The next day, Oliver gets a glossy brochure through his door – he has a 
              read through and it looks very slick and professional. The website also 
              seems completely legitimate. Oliver likes to think he’s an intelligent 
              person, and Paul seems very nice and credible. In fact, Paul calls back 
              that afternoon, and Oliver decides that you only live once – why not go 
              for it? You have to speculate to accumulate. 
              Within a couple of hours, a courier comes round with some papers to 
              sign. Oliver has a quick look through them and is surprised to see that 
              the documents say he is now a company director and trustee of his 
              pension scheme. He doesn’t remember Paul saying anything about 
              making him a company director, but the courier can’t give him any more 
              information and Oliver keeps thinking of the time-limited offer. So he 
              signs on the dotted line. 
                                                                                          Pension scams Help for individuals    4
              Later that year, Oliver decides to call up and check on how his 
              investment’s doing. The line is disconnected, so he searches online 
              and ifnds out that some pension transfer offers are scams. After several 
              more months of trying to locate Paul and the missing money, Oliver 
              calls the police and comes to realise that he has probably lost his whole 
              pension pot. By signing the papers and becoming a company director, 
              he has taken on new legal duties with Companies House and HMRC 
              that he didn’t know about. This leads to HMRC ifning him for tax-related 
              offences. Not only has Oliver lost 15 years’ worth of savings – he’s also 
              having to pay thousands of pounds in ifnes to the authorities. 
                     What should Oliver have spotted?
                     •    Cold call
                     •    Claims of adviser being authorised by government – 
                          but not registered with the FCA
                     •    Promises of cash back under the age of 55
                     •    Unrealistic returns of at least 8% 
                     •    Promises of higher returns if he agrees to being 
                          ‘locked in’ to a single investment for a number of years
                     •    Being rushed into signing couriered documents with 
                          promises of a time-limited offer
                     •    Documents naming him as company director and 
                          trustee of the pension scheme
                                                                                          Pension scams Help for individuals   5
                      How to scamproof yourself
                       •  Stop. Think about it. A genuine adviser will never 
                            rush you into a decision
                       •  Make sure the adviser is registered by the Financial 
                            Conduct Authority at www.fca.org.uk/register
                       •  Look at the FCA’s Scamsmart warning list at  
                            www.fca.org.uk/scamsmart – this will tell you  
                            the names of investment schemes that are  
                            known scams
                       •  If you are approaching 55 or about to retire, 
                            Pension Wise can tell you more about what you can 
                            do with your retirement pot. Visit the website at 
                            www.pensionwise.gov.uk 
                       •  Before you sign anything, call The Pensions 
                            Advisory Service on 0300 123 1047 for information 
                            and advice about pension scams
                       •  If you’ve already signed the papers, report it to 
                            Action Fraud at www.actionfraud.police.uk or call  
                            0300 123 2040
                             If you take ifnancial advice by someone registered with the FCA, you may be able to 
                             claim compensation if something goes wrong. If the adviser isn’t registered, you risk 
                             losing everything.
                                                                                          Pension scams Help for individuals    6
                          Information and guidance 
                          on options when 
                          approaching retirement:
                          www.pensionwise.gov.uk
                          Impartial information and 
                          guidance on scams:
                          0300 123 1047 
                          www.pensionsadvisoryservice.org.uk
                          If you suspect a scam, call:
    A cross-government initiative by:
                                               Pension scams 
                                               Help for individuals  
                                                
                                               © The Pensions Regulator March 2015
                                               You can reproduce the text in this 
                                               publication as long as you quote 
                                               The Pensions Regulator’s name and 
                                               the title of the publication. Please 
                                               contact us if you have any questions 
                                               about this publication. We can 
                                               produce it in Braille, large print or 
                                               on audio tape. We can also produce 
                                               it in other languages.
