                                       COSHH:a brief guide to the Regulations
                                             Health and Safety 
                                             Executive
     COSHH:A brief guide to the
     Regulations
     What you need to know about the Control of Substances
     Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 (COSHH)
      COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
      This leaflet is written mainly for employers to help them to meet their
      specific duties under COSHH. It will also be useful to safety
      representatives, health and safety professionals and anyone interested 
      in health and safety issues.
      2
                                                                     COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
        Why COSHH matters                                Hazardous substances
        Using chemicals or other hazardous substances atHazardous substances include:
        work can put people’s health at risk, so the law
        requires employers to control exposure to hazardous■ substances used directly in work activities (eg 
        substances to prevent ill health. They have to protectadhesives, paints, cleaning agents);
        both employees and others who may be exposed by■ substances generated during work activities (eg 
        complying with the Control of Substances Hazardousfumes from soldering and welding);
        to Health Regulations 2002 (COSHH) (as amended).■ naturally occurring substances (eg grain dust);
                                                         ■ biological agents such as bacteria and other 
        COSHH is a useful tool of good management whichmicro-organisms.
        sets eight basic measures that employers, and
        sometimes employees, must take. These are set out inWhere are hazardous substances found?
        this leaflet with a simple step-by-step approach which
                                                         In nearly all work environments, for example:
        will help you to assess risks, implement any measures
        needed to control exposure and establish good    ■ factories;
        working practices.                               ■ shops;
                                                         ■ mines;
        If you as an employer fail to adequately control
                                                         ■ farms;
        hazardous substances, your employees or others may
                                                         ■ laboratories;
        become ill. Effects from hazardous substances range
                                                         ■ offices.
        from mild eye irritation to chronic lung disease or, on
        occasions, death. This may:                      Effects of hazardous substances
                                                         Examples of the effects of hazardous substances
        ■ result in lost productivity to your business;  include:
        ■ leave you liable to enforcement action, including 
           prosecution under the COSHH Regulations;      ■ skin irritation or dermatitis as a result of skin 
        ■ result in civil claims from your employees.       contact;
                                                         ■ asthma as a result of developing allergy to 
        There can be positive benefits to your business fromsubstances used at work;
        carefully following through the requirements of  ■ losing consciousness as a result of being 
        COSHH:                                              overcome by toxic fumes;
                                                         ■ cancer, which may appear long after the exposure 
        ■ improved productivity as a result of using more   to the chemical that caused it;
           effective controls (eg less use of raw material);■ infection from bacteria and other micro-organisms 
        ■ improved employee morale;                         (biological agents).
        ■ better employee understanding and compliance 
           with health and safety requirements.
        Details of all publications mentioned in this leaflet may
        be found in the reference section at the end of this
        leaflet. All publication titles are in italics.
                                                                                                     3
         COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         What COSHH requires
         To comply with COSHH you need to follow these eight steps:
            Step 1    Assess the risks               Assess the risks to health from                     page 6
                                                     hazardous substances used in or 
                                                     created by your workplace activities.
            Step 2    Decide what                    You must not carry out work which could             page 8
                      precautions are                expose your employees to hazardous
                      needed                         substances without first considering the 
                                                     risks and the necessary precautions, and what 
                                                     what else you need to do to comply with COSHH.
            Step 3    Prevent or adequately          You must prevent your employees being               page 10
                      control exposure               exposed to hazardous substances. Where 
                                                     preventing exposure is not reasonably 
                                                     practicable, then you must adequately control 
                                                     it. The advice in this leaflet, and in the other 
                                                     guidance it refers to, will help you to make 
                                                     correct assessments and to put the appropriate 
                                                     controls into place.
            Step 4    Ensure that control            Ensure that control measures are used and           page 12
                      measures are used              maintained properly and that safety 
                      and maintained                 procedures are followed.
            Step 5    Monitor the exposure           Monitor the exposure of employees to                page 12
                                                     hazardous substances, if necessary.
            Step 6    Carry out appropriate          Carry out appropriate health surveillance where     page 13
                      health surveillance            your assessment has shown this is necessary 
                                                     or where COSHH sets specific requirements.
            Step 7    Prepare plans and              Prepare plans and procedures to deal with           page 13
                      procedures to deal with        accidents, incidents and emergencies 
                      with accidents, incidents      involving hazardous substances, where 
                      and emergencies                necessary.
            Step 8    Ensure employees are           You should provide your employees with              page 14
                      properly informed,             suitable and sufficient information, instruction 
                      trained and supervised         and training.
         4
                                                                             COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         What is a substance hazardous to                      What is not a substance hazardous to
         health under COSHH?                                   health under COSHH?
         Under COSHH there are a range of substances           COSHH applies to virtually all substances hazardous
         regarded as hazardous to health:                      to health except:
         ■ Substances or mixtures of substances classified as■ asbestos and lead, which have their own 
             dangerous to health under the Chemicals (Hazard regulations;
             Information and Packaging for Supply) Regulations■ substances which are hazardous only because they
             2002 (CHIP). These can be identified by their        are: 
             warning label and the supplier must provide a -      radioactive; 
             safety data sheet for them. Many commonly used -at high pressure; 
             dangerous substances are listed in the HSE        -  at extreme temperatures; or 
             publication Approved Supply List. Information     -  have explosive or flammable properties (other 
             approved for the classification and labelling of     regulations apply to these risks);
             substances and preparations dangerous for supply, ■ biological agents that are outside the employer’s 
             as part of the CHIP package. Suppliers must          control, eg catching an infection from a workmate. 
             decide if preparations and substances that are not (If in doubt, please contact HSE for advice.)
             in the Approved Supply Listare dangerous, and 
             if so, label them accordingly.                    For the vast majority of commercial chemicals, the
         ■ Substances with workplace exposure limitsare        presence (or not) of a warning label will indicate
             listed in the HSE publication EH40/2005           whether COSHH is relevant. For example, there is no
             Workplace exposure limits.                        warning label on ordinary household washing-up
         ■ Biological agents (bacteria and other micro-        liquid, so if it’s used at work you do not have to worry
             organisms), if they are directly connected with the about COSHH; but there is a warning label on bleach,
             work, such as with farming, sewage treatment, or and so COSHH does apply to its use in the workplace.
             healthcare, or if the exposure is incidental to the 
             work (eg exposure to bacteria from an air-
             conditioning system that is not properly 
             maintained).
         ■ Any kind of dust if its average concentration in the 
             air exceeds the levels specified in COSHH.
         ■ Any other substance which creates a risk to health, 
             but which for technical reasons may not be 
             specifically covered by CHIP including: 
             asphyxiants (ie gases such as argon and helium, 
             which, while not dangerous in themselves, can 
             endanger life by reducing the amount of oxygen 
             available to breathe), pesticides, medicines, 
             cosmetics or substances produced in chemical 
             processes.
                                                                                                                5
       COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
       Step 1                               Step 1: Assess the risks
       Assess the risks
                                            Your first step is to decide whether there is a problem
       Step 2                               with the substance(s) your company is using, or those
       Decide what precautions are          to which your employees are incidentally exposed.
       needed                               This is called a risk assessment. 
       Step 3
       Prevent or adequately control           You must:
       exposure
                                               ■ identify the hazardous substances present 
       Step 4                                    in your workplace;
       Ensure that control measures            ■ consider the risks these substances present 
       are used and maintained                   to people’s health.
       Step 5
       Monitor exposure                     Identify the hazardous substances present in
                                            your workplace
       Step 6                               Look at the list on page 5. Remember to think about
       Carry out appropriate health         substances which have been supplied to you; those
       surveillance                         produced by your work activity, eg fumes, vapours,
                                            aerosols, final products and waste materials; and those
       Step 7                               naturally or incidentally present in your workplace, eg
       Prepare plans and procedures         infectious agents carried by farm animals.
       to deal with accidents, incidents 
       and emergencies                      Other sources of information which will help you
                                            identify hazardous substances are:
       Step 8
       Ensure that employees are            ■ trade associations;
       properly informed, trained and       ■ other employers in the same business;
       supervised                           ■ HSE website (www.hse.gov.uk) and HSE guidance, 
                                               such as EH40/2005 Workplace exposure limits;
                                            ■ HSE publication CHIP Approved Supply List;
                                            ■ the Internet.
       6
                                                                            COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         Consider the risks these substances present toWho should do the assessment?
         people’s health                                      As the employer, legal responsibility for the
         Assessing the risk involves making a judgement onassessment is yours, but others can do some or even
         how likely it is that a hazardous substance will affectmost of the work of preparing it on your behalf. Except
         someone’s health. You need to ask yourself:          in very simple cases, whoever carries out the
                                                              assessment will need to:
         ■ How much of the substance is in use or produced 
            by the work activity and how could people be ■ have access to and understand the COSHH 
            exposed to it? For supplied substances HSE has Regulations and relevant Approved Codes of 
            developed a generic risk assessment guide to          Practice or to someone else who does;
            help. It uses information on hazard, amount used ■ be able to get all the necessary information and 
            and simple definitions of dustiness for solids or  have the knowledge and experience to make 
            volatility for liquids. The guide is called COSHH     correct decisions about the risks and the actions 
            essentials: Easy steps to control chemicals. The      needed.
            guide also helps you with the next two steps – 
            deciding what action you need to take to control You and your employees have the most knowledge of
            risks and controlling exposure. As well as the  what really happens in the workplace. Use this
            published version, COSHH essentialscan be         knowledge before deciding whether you need outside
            found free on the Internet at:                    help. If there is no expertise available in the company
            www.coshh-essentials.org.uk, where you can        to assess the more complex risks, you will need to get
            follow the steps quickly and easily online.       competent help, for example from a professionally
                                                              qualified occupational hygienist, health and safety
         ■ Who could be exposed to the substance and how 
                                                              specialist or a trade association.
            often? You must remember to include all groups of
            people who could come into contact with the 
                                                              Your employees or their safety representatives or
            substance, ie contractors, visitors and members of
                                                              safety committee should be involved in assessments.
            the public, as well as your employees. Do not 
                                                              They have valuable contributions to make. They must
            forget those involved in cleaning and maintenance 
                                                              also be informed of the results of the assessment.
            tasks – high exposures can occur during this type 
            of work. Also, certain groups of people could 
            suffer more from exposure than others, eg 
            pregnant women, individuals with a suppressed 
            immune system.
         ■ Is there a possibility of substances being absorbed
            through the skin or swallowed (eg as a result of a 
            substance getting into the mouth from 
            contaminated hands during eating or smoking)? 
            Are there risks to your employees at other 
            locations if they work away from your main 
            workplace? See the HSE guidance Working alone 
            in safetyfor solitary workers away from their 
            home base.
                                                                                                               7
          COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
          Step 2: Decide what precautions are                             practical application to chemical exposuresets 
          needed                                                          out when biological monitoring is useful and the 
                                                                          procedures for setting up an effective programme.
          If you identify significant risks, decide on the action
          you need to take to remove or reduce them to What further action should be taken? 
          acceptable levels.                                           If you decide that there are risks to health, you must
                                                                       take action to protect your employees’ (and others’)
          To help you decide whether risks are significant, health. The rest of the steps in this booklet will 
          we suggest you compare any controls you already help you.
          use with:
                                                                       Even if you judge that the control measures being
          ■ Good practice advice from HSE (see                         used fully control the risks, you should still go
              www.hse.gov.uk), including advice from COSHH             through the remaining steps to ensure you are fully
              essentials: Easy steps to control chemicals. This        complying with COSHH. This will also help you
              guide is for supplied substances. It takes you ensure your controls stay effective.
              through a simple risk assessment and identifies 
              what is needed to control exposure. It provides Recording and reviewing the assessment
              detailed advice on control measures for a number If you have five or more employees you must make
              of common industrial operations. If the controls and keep a record of the main findings of the
              you have in place are the same or more stringent assessment, either in writing or on computer. The
              than those recommended by the guide, then you record should be made as soon as practicable after
              are likely to be taking the right type of action.the assessment and contain enough information to
          ■ The results of monitoring workers’ exposure with explain the decisions you have taken about whether
              workplace exposure limits (WELs) published in  risks are significant and the need for any control
              EH40/2005 Workplace exposure limits. See Step 3          measures. Also record the actions your employees
              for information on adequate control.                     and others need to take to ensure hazardous
          ■ Good work practices and standards used by or substances are adequately controlled. If you decide
              recommended for your industry sector, eg trade           that there is no risk to health or the risk is trivial, you
              associations, Health and Safety Commission               may need to record the identity of the substance, the
              (HSC) advisory committees. Also check your               control measures taken, and the fact that it poses little
              chemical supplier or manufacturer’s advice on            or no risk.
              storage, use and disposal.
                                                                       The COSHH Approved Code of Practice(ACOP)
          Remember to:                                                 provides more information on what the record of the
                                                                       main findings of the assessment should contain (see
          ■ check that your control systems work and are ‘Further advice and information’ on page 15).
              effective;
          ■ consider whether the substance could be absorbedIf a generic risk assessment using COSHH essentials
              through the skin. Where this could occur, a              has been carried out, the completed forms or print
              biological monitoring programme may help you to outs could be used as a basis for the record of the
              assess the risks. The HSE publication Biological         risk assessment.
              monitoring in the workplace: a guide to its 
          8
                                      COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
     The assessment should be a ‘living’ document, which
     you revisit if circumstances change. It should
     definitely be reviewed when:
     ■ there is reason to suspect the assessment is no 
       longer valid;
     ■ there has been a significant change in the work;
     ■ the results of monitoring employees’ exposure (see
       Step 5) shows it to be necessary.
     The assessment should state when the next review is
     planned. Records are mainly for your benefit and form
     part of your system to protect health, but others may
     want to see them, eg safety representatives, safety
     committees, health and safety inspectors.
                                                        9
         COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         Step 3: Prevent or adequately controlThe COSHH Essentials: Easy steps to control
         exposure                                              chemicals guide and free website (www.coshh-
                                                               essentials.org.uk) give advice on adequate control
         Prevent exposure                                      measures for supplied chemicals and a number of
         The COSHH Regulations require you to prevent          common industrial operations. For supplied chemicals
         exposure to substances hazardous to health, if it isit is important that you work through the risk
         reasonably practicable to do so. You might:           assessment process it outlines, to arrive at the right
                                                               measures for your chemicals and tasks. 
         ■ change the process or activity so that the 
             hazardous substance is not needed or generated;Meaning of ‘adequate control’
         ■ replace it with a safer alternative;                Under COSHH, adequate control of exposure to a
         ■ use it in a safer form, eg pellets instead of powder.substance hazardous to health means:
         The HSE guidance booklet Seven steps to successful    ■ applying the eight principles of good practice set 
         substitution of hazardous substancesadvises on how       out in Schedule 2A to COSHH; 
         to replace hazardous substances with safer            ■ not exceeding the workplace exposure limit (WEL) 
         alternatives.                                            for the substance (if there is one); and
                                                               ■ if the substance causes cancer, heritable genetic 
         Adequately control exposure                              damage or asthma, reducing exposure to as low a 
         If prevention is not reasonably practicable, you mustlevel as is reasonably practicable.
         adequately control exposure. You should consider and
         put in place measures appropriate to the activity andHSC has established WELs for a number of
         consistent with the risk assessment, including, in substances hazardous to health. These are intended to
         order of priority, one or more of the following:      prevent excessive exposure to specified hazardous
                                                               substances by containing exposure below a set limit. 
         ■ use appropriate work processes, systems and         A WEL is the maximum concentration of an airborne
             engineering controls, and provide suitable work  substance, averaged over a reference period, to which
             equipment and materials eg use processes which employees may be exposed by inhalation. WELs are
             minimise the amount of material used or produced,listed in EH40/2005 Workplace exposure limits.
             or equipment which totally encloses the process;Correctly applying the principles of good practice will
         ■ control exposure at source (eg local exhaust        mean exposures are controlled below the WEL. Advice
             ventilation), and reduce the number of employees on applying the principles can be found in the 
             exposed to a minimum, the level and duration of COSHH ACOP.
             their exposure, and the quantity of hazardous 
             substances used or produced in the workplace;Adequate control of carcinogens, mutagens and
         ■ provide personal protective equipment (eg face      asthmagens
             masks, respirators, protective clothing), but only asCOSHH acknowledges the particular hazards of
             a last resort and never as a replacement for other substances which cause cancer, heritable genetic
             control measures which are required.              damage or asthma by requiring that exposure to these
                                                               is reduced to as low a level as is reasonably
                                                               practicable. The HSE website contains guidance on
                                                               suitable controls. 
         10
                                      COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
     For carcinogens (substances which may cause cancer)
     or mutagens (substances which may cause heritable
     genetic damage) special requirements apply. These are
     in regulation 7(5) of COSHH and explained in
     Appendix 1 of the COSHH ACOP.
     Skin absorption
     Some substances can damage the skin itself while
     others can readily penetrate it, become absorbed into
     the body and cause harm, so you must consider the
     need to protect skin when deciding on control
     measures. The guide COSHH essentials: Easy steps to
     control chemicalscontains useful advice on skin
     protection. 
                                                       11
         COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         Step 4: Ensure that control measuresStep 5: Monitor exposure
         are used and maintained
                                                              Under COSHH, you have to measure the concentration
         Using the controls                                   of hazardous substances in the air breathed in by
         COSHH requires your employees to make proper useworkers where your assessment concludes that:
         of control measures and to report defects. It is your
         responsibility to take all reasonable steps to ensure■ there could be serious risks to health if control 
         that they do so. This is why you must give yourmeasures failed or deteriorated;
         employees suitable training, information and         ■ exposure limits might be exceeded; or
         appropriate supervision (see Step 8 for a more       ■ control measures might not be working properly.
         detailed explanation).
                                                              However, you do not need to do this if you can show
         Maintain controls                                    by another method of evaluation that you are
         COSHH places specific duties on you to ensure thatpreventing or adequately controlling employees’
         exposure controls are maintained. The objective beingexposure to hazardous substances, eg a system which
         to ensure that every element of the control measureautomatically sounds an alarm if it detects hazardous
         continues to perform as originally intended. This substances. The COSHH ACOPprovides examples of
         applies to items of equipment such as local exhaustother alternative methods of evaluation.
         ventilation and to systems of work, which will have to
         be regularly checked to make sure that they are stillAir monitoring must be carried out when employees
         effective. Respiratory protective equipment should alsoare exposed to certain substances and processes
         be examined and, where appropriate, tested at suitablespecified in Schedule 5 to the COSHH Regulations.
         intervals. COSHH sets specific intervals between     Where it is appropriate to carry out personal air
         examinations for local exhaust ventilation equipment,monitoring, the air to be sampled is the space around
         and you must retain records of examinations and 
                                                              the worker’s face from where the breath is taken, ie the
         tests carried out (or a summary of them) for at least
                                                              breathing zone.
         five years.
                                                              You should keep and maintain a record of any
                                                              exposure monitoring you carry out for at least five
                                                              years. Where an employee has a health record
                                                              (required where they are under health surveillance, see
                                                              Step 6), any monitoring results relevant to them as an
                                                              individual must be kept with their health record. They
                                                              should be allowed access to their personal 
                                                              monitoring record.
                                                              You can find more information on monitoring in the
                                                              HSE guidance 
                                                                            Monitoring strategies for toxic
                                                              substances.
         12
                                                                           COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         Step 6: Carry out appropriate health                Step 7: Prepare plans and procedures
         surveillance                                        to deal with accidents, incidents and
                                                             emergencies
         COSHH requires you to carry out health surveillance
         in the following circumstances:                     This will apply where the work activity gives rise to a
                                                             risk of an accident, incident or emergency involving
         ■ where an employee is exposed to one of the  exposure to a hazardous substance, which goes well
            substances listed in Schedule 6 to COSHH and is beyond the risks associated with normal day-to-day
            working in one of the related processes, eg  work. In such circumstances, you must plan your
            manufacture of certain compounds of benzene,  response to an emergency involving hazardous
            and there is a reasonable likelihood that an     substances before it happens.
            identifiable disease or adverse health effect will 
            result from that exposure;                       That means preparing procedures and setting up
         ■ where employees are exposed to a substance  warning and communication systems to enable an
            linked to a particular disease or adverse health appropriate response immediately any incident occurs,
                                                             and ensuring that information on your emergency
            effect and there is a reasonable likelihood, under 
                                                             arrangements is available to those who need to see it,
            the conditions of the work, of that disease or effect 
                                                             including the emergency services. It also requires
            occurring and it is possible to detect the disease or
            health effect.                                   these ‘safety drills’ to be practised at regular intervals.
         Health surveillance might involve examination by a  If any accident, incident or emergency occurs you
         doctor or trained nurse. In some cases trained      must ensure that immediate steps are taken to
                                                             minimise the harmful effects, restore the situation to
         supervisors could, for example, check employees’ skin
         for dermatitis, or ask questions about breathing normal and inform employees who may be affected.
                                                             Only those staff necessary to deal with the incident
         difficulties where work involves substances known to
         cause asthma (see the questionnaire in the HSE      may remain in the area and they must be provided with
                                                             appropriate safety equipment.
         publication Preventing asthma at work. How to control
         respiratory sensitisers). You must keep a simple
                                                             However, you do not have to introduce these
         record (a ‘health record’) of any health surveillance
         carried out. COSHH requires you to keep health emergency procedures if:
         records for at least 40 years. (If a business ceases to
         trade, its health records should be offered to HSE for■ the quantities of substances hazardous to health 
         safe keeping.)                                         present in your workplace are such that they 
                                                                present only a slight risk to your employees’ 
         For further information you can refer to the HSE       health; and
         guidance Health surveillance under COSHH: guidance ■ the measures you have put in place under Step 3 
         for employers. Biological monitoring can also have a   are sufficient to control that risk;
         role in health surveillance. You can find further
         information on setting up a biological monitoringbut, the requirements described in Step 7 must be
         programme in the HSE publication Biological         complied with in full where either carcinogens,
         monitoring in the workplace: a guide to its practicalmutagens or biological agents are used.
         application to chemical exposure.
                                                                                                           13
     COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
     Step 8: Ensure that employees are
     properly informed, trained and
     supervised
     COSHH requires you to provide your employees with
     suitable and sufficient information, instruction and
     training which should include:
     ■ the names of the substances they work with or 
      could be exposed to and the risks created by such 
      exposure, and access to any safety data sheets 
      that apply to those substances;
     ■ the main findings of your risk assessment;
     ■ the precautions they should take to protect 
      themselves and other employees;
     ■ how to use personal protective equipment and 
      clothing provided;
     ■ results of any exposure monitoring and health 
      surveillance (without giving individual employees’ 
      names);
     ■ emergency procedures which need to be followed.
     You should update and adapt the information,
     instruction and training to take account of significant
     changes in the type of work carried out or work
     methods used. You should also ensure that you
     provide information etc that is appropriate to the level
     of risk identified by the assessment and in a manner
     and form in which it will be understood by employees.
     These requirements are vital. You must ensure your
     employees understand the risks from the hazardous
     substances they could be exposed to. Your control
     measures will not be fully effective if your employees
     do not know their purpose, how to use them properly,
     or the importance of reporting faults.
     14
                                                                            COSHH:A brief guide to the Regulations
         Further advice and information                       EH40/2005 Workplace exposure limits: Containing the
                                                              list of workplace exposure limits for use with the
         If in doubt, contact your local HSE office (the addressControl of Substances Hazardous to Health
         is in the phone book). The staff there can refer you toRegulations 2002 (as amended) Environmental
         the appropriate inspector or the environmental healthHygiene Guidance Note EH40 HSE Books 2005 
         officer at your local authority.                     ISBN 0 7176 2977 5
         COSHH publications                                   Biological monitoring in the workplace: A guide to its
         Control of substances hazardous to health. The       practical application to chemical exposure HSG167
         Control of Substances Hazardous to Health            HSE Books 1997 ISBN 0 7176 1279 1
         Regulations 2002 (as amended). Approved Code of
         Practice and guidanceL5 (Fifth edition) HSE Books    Biological monitoring in the workplace: Information for
         2005 ISBN 0 7176 2981 3                              employees on its application to chemical exposure
                                                              Leaflet INDG245 HSE Books 1997 (single copy free or
         COSHH essentials: Easy steps to control chemicals.priced packs of 15 ISBN 0 7176 1450 6)
         Control of Substances Hazardous to Health
         Regulations HSG193 (Second edition) HSE Books        Seven steps to successful substitution of hazardous
         2003 ISBN 0 7176 2737 3 (an electronic version issubstances HSG110 HSE Books 1994 
         available at: www.coshh-essentials.org.uk)           ISBN 0 7176 0695 3
         Related publications                                 Maintenance, examination and testing of local exhaust
         The idiot’s guide to CHIP 3: Chemicals (Hazard       ventilation HSG54 (Second edition) HSE Books 1998
         Information and Packaging for Supply) RegulationsISBN 0 7176 1485 9
         2002 Leaflet INDG350 HSE Books 2002 (single copy
         free or priced packs of 5 ISBN 0 7176 2333 5)Respiratory Protective Equipment at work: A practical
                                                              guide HSG53 (Third Edition) HSE Books 2005 
         Approved supply list. Information approved for the ISBN 0 7176 2904 X
         classification and labelling of substances and
         preparations dangerous for supply. Chemicals (Hazard Monitoring strategies for toxic substances HSG173
         Information and Packaging for Supply) RegulationsHSE Books 1997 ISBN 0 7176 1411 5
         2002. Approved list L129 (Seventh edition) HSE
         Books 2002 ISBN 0 7176 2368 8                        Preventing asthma at work. How to control respiratory
                                                              sensitisers L55 HSE Books 1994 ISBN 0 7176 0661 9
         Approved classification and labelling guide. Chemicals
         (Hazard Information and Packaging for Supply)        Guidance on working with dangerous pathogens in a
         Regulations 2002. Guidance on Regulations L131       variety of workplaces, including laboratories and
         (Fifth edition) HSE Books 2002 ISBN 0 7176 2369 6healthcare premises, has been produced by the
                                                              Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens
                                                              (ACDP), and is available on the HSE website at:
                                                              www.hse.gov.uk/aboutus/meetings/acdp/index.htm
                                                                                                              15
                                              Health and safety 
                                              Executive
     Further information
     HSE priced and free publications are available by mail
     order from HSE Books, PO Box 1999, Sudbury, Suffolk
     CO10 2WA Tel: 01787 881165 Fax: 01787 313995
     Website: www.hsebooks.co.uk (HSE priced
     publications are also available from bookshops and
     free leaflets can be downloaded from HSE’s website:
     www.hse.gov.uk.)
     For information about health and safety ring HSE's
     Infoline Tel: 0845 345 0055 Fax: 0845 408 9566 
     e-mail: hseinformationservices@natbrit.com or write to
     HSE Information Services, Caerphilly Business Park,
     Caerphilly CF83 3GG. 
     The Stationery Office publications are available from
     The Stationery Office, PO Box 29, Norwich NR3 1GN
     Tel: 0870 600 5522 Fax: 0870 600 5533 e-mail:
     customer.services@tso.co.uk Website: www.tso.co.uk
     (They are also available from bookshops.)
     This leaflet contains notes on good practice which are
     not compulsory but which you may find helpful in
     considering what you need to do.
     This leaflet is available in priced packs of 10 from HSE
     Books, ISBN 0 7176 2982 1. Single free copies are
     also available from HSE Books. 
     © Crown copyrightThis publication may be freely
     reproduced, except for advertising, endorsement or
     commercial purposes. First published 04/05. Please
     acknowledge the source as HSE.
     INDG136rev3          04/05          C2000
     Printed and published by the Health and Safety
     Executive
     16
