                                               1 
        
        
        
        
        
         Health and Safety in the Salon 
        
                             
          Beauty Therapy - Learner Manual 
        
        
        
                                                 
        
                     
       © VTCT. 2016                              
                                                                                                                                2 
                   
                  Health and Safety in the Salon  
                   
                  Aim 
                  The aim of this manual is to develop understanding of the principles of health and safety at 
                  work within a salon, barbershop or spa. It will introduce the overarching legislation and 
                  explore the measures designed to protect the health and safety of people in the workplace, 
                  including staff, visitors and members of the public. It will also develop knowledge of how to 
                  recognize hazards and their associated risks along with the understanding of skills required 
                  to manage a safe and hygienic work environment that meets with the necessary regulations 
                  and legislation requirements. 
                   
                  Learning outcomes  
                  By the end of this unit the learner will:  
                    •    Know the principles of health and safety   
                    •    Understand how to maintain health, safety, hygiene and security practices  
                    •    Understand how to follow emergency procedures 
                                                                
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                  3 
               
              Terminology  
                  
              Health                 A state of wellbeing   
              Safety                 The absence of risks   
              Workplace              Any area or building where people work 
              Health and safety      A document outlining an employer’s policy and commitment 
              policy                 to health and safety   
              Health and Safety      The body that regulates health and safety and enforces 
              Executive (HSE)        authority   
              Accident               An unplanned and uncontrolled event with the potential to 
                                     cause injury 
              Hazard                 Something that has the potential to cause harm   
              Risk                   The likelihood that a hazard will cause harm   
              Personal protective    Specialist equipment or clothing to protect from harm 
              equipment  (PPE)       against safety hazards, e.g. gloves, goggles, protective 
                                     apron  
              Welfare                The provision of facilities and any other measures to ensure 
                                     a person’s wellbeing   
              Appointed person       A person with specific duties, for example relating to first aid 
                                     but not necessarily a person who is trained in first aid 
                                     Feeling anxious, unwanted pressure that can cause harm to 
              Work related stress    the mind and body and has strong links to absences from 
                                     work   
               
                                          
              © VTCT. 2016                                                                          
                                                                                                                                4 
                   
                  Section 1: The principles of health and safety   
                   
                  The importance of health and safety  
                  Health and safety is important to keep people and safe and prevent them from harm! 
                   
                  The main purpose of the various laws and legislation is to ensure health, safety and welfare 
                  of people is a priority! These laws apply to all working environments, including hair and 
                  beauty salons and to self-employed and mobile hairdressers and beauty therapists.  
                   
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
                  Health and safety law applies to everyone in the workplace – employers, staff, customers 
                  and visitors or guests. 
                    •    Employers have responsibility to provide and maintain a safe working environment and 
                         welfare facilities. They are also responsible for developing policies and standard or 
                         normal operating procedures to guide safe practice. 
                    •    Employers must provide safe working systems 
                    •    Staff need to follow these procedures in all their daily activities. They need to be 
                         inducted to health and safety requirements and receive other specialist training 
                         required for their work role, e.g. risk assessment, first aid, manual handling, safe use of 
                         chemicals.   
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                5 
                   
                    •    Customers, visitors and guests need to be informed of appropriate rules and 
                         behaviours to ensure they also take responsibility for their safety, e.g. following 
                         instructions from signs provided, such as not walking across a wet floor where a sign 
                         has been displayed.  
                                  Everyone has responsibility for maintaining health and safety. 
                   
                  The main factors that influence health and safety in a hair and or beauty salon include: 
                    •    Environmental factors – conditions in the workplace and working area, for example 
                         the working temperature, ventilation and noise  
                    •    Occupational factors – the potential risk of certain illnesses due to the services or 
                         treatments being offered, for example asthma from exposure to certain hairdressing or 
                         beauty products 
                    •    Human factors – how people can contribute to accidents due to inappropriate or poor 
                         behaviour, carelessness, error or haste  
                     
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                            
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                6 
                   
                  The legal and regulatory requirements for health and safety 
                  There are numerous guiding legislations for health and safety.  
                    •    The Health and Safety at Work Act (1974)  
                    •    The Health and Safety at Work Act (1974) was the main piece of legislation offering 
                         directives to maintain health and safety in England, Scotland and Wales. The Act was 
                         expanded, and in 1999, was replaced by the Management of Health and Safety at 
                         Work Regulations. 1999  
                    •    The Health and Safety at Work Order 1978 (Northern Ireland) was the main piece of 
                         legislation for Northern Ireland. The Act was expanded, and in 2000, was superseded 
                         by the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 2000 (Northern Ireland) 
                   
                         Despite these developments, the main guiding principles of both the Health  
                       and Safety at Work Act (1974) and the Health and Safety at Work Order 1978 
                                                        (Northern Ireland) continue 
                   
                  The main guiding principles include:  
                    •    The health, safety and welfare of all people should be maintained at all times and all 
                         organisations should operate within policy guidelines.  
                    •    Hazardous chemicals or substances should be handled and stored securely and risk of 
                         emission should be controlled.  
                    •    People should be protected against any risks that may occur as a result of activities in 
                         the workplace.  
                    •    The work place should provide clean and hygienic facilities, including the availability of 
                         drinking water, changing areas and toilets, first aid rooms in larger organisations  
                    •    Appropriate equipment should be provided for use and adequately maintained.  
                    •    The appointment of qualified staff to provide supervision and instruction (as 
                         appropriate) and the provision of additional training, as required, e.g. first aid and 
                         health and safety. 
                    •    Adequate insurance to cover accidents, e.g. employer and public liability  
                    •    The provision of reporting and recording mechanisms, e.g. accident books  
                    •    Regular review and evaluation of all healthy and safety policies and procedures to 
                         ensure they are current, valid and reliable.   
                        
                          Employers and employees have direct responsibilities for health and safety  
                         and a ‘duty of care’ to take reasonable and practicable steps to ensure that 
                                                 people are kept safe and free from harm. 
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                7 
                   
                  Employers must                                          Employees must  
                  •    Provide and maintain safe working                  •   Act responsibly and not endanger self 
                       environment.                                           or others by an individual’s actions. 
                  •    Provide adequate welfare facilities.               •   Co-operate with an employer to fulfil 
                       Provide safe systems of work.                          duties. 
                  •    Provide information, training and                  •   Not misuse anything provided in the 
                       supervision.                                           interests of health and safety. 
                  •    Ensure the safe handling, storage and              •   Report all accidents, incidents and 
                       movement of goods and materials.                       unsafe conditions of practice. 
                       Provide and maintain safe equipment.  
                  For example:                                            For example: 
                  •    Providing a training session specifically          •   Mandatory attendance at training 
                       dealing with the salon’s policies and                  sessions. 
                       reporting on sickness and general                  •   Ensuring they present a professional 
                       welfare, handling and storage of                       image. 
                       equipment                                          •   Ensuring their conduct is professional 
                  •    Providing training sessions for                        and aligns with salon guidance.  
                       hairdressing and/or beauty therapy to              •   Reporting verbally or in writing to 
                       develop skills and product knowledge                   manager, supervisor or salon owner any 
                  •    Providing a salon uniform.                             accidents or incidents, however minor, 
                  •    Providing training on professional                     that may occur 
                       conduct and how to greet clients and 
                       answer telephone calls   
                   
                                 All organisations employing more than five people are required  
                                                  to display a health and safety poster. 
                   
                  Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations. 1999 and Management 
                  of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 2000 (Northern Ireland) 
                  The 1999/2000 regulations emphasised the importance of risk assessment to ensure safety. 
                  All staff, whether employed or self-employed have a responsibility to assess their working 
                  areas and assess any risk to themselves, their work colleagues and members of the public. 
                  The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) provide five simple steps for assessing and 
                  managing risk  
                   1.  Identify the hazards (anything that may cause harm) 
                   2.  Determine who may be harmed  
                   3.  Evaluate the level of risk (likelihood and severity) and decide on precautions needed  
                   4.  Record all findings  
                   5.  Review and update regularly  
                   
                  Further information on risk assessment is available from the HSE: 
                  http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/controlling-risks.htm.  
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                8 
                   
                                                                                                             
                   
                  Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 1995 
                  (RIDDOR) 
                  The RIDDOR regulations require that ALL injuries, diseases and dangerous events that 
                  happen in the workplace are recorded using the appropriate recording document and 
                  reported to the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). 
                             Work-related illnesses may include dermatitis or occupational asthma  
                                           from the use of specific hair or beauty products. 
                  The HSE are responsible for enforcing safety regulations and investigate reported incidents 
                  and provide advice to organisations. Enforcement of regulations may include prosecution, if 
                  appropriate steps have not been taken.   
                              Employees must ensure that they have notified the employer of any  
                      potential work-related illness, injury or dangerous occurrence that occurs within  
                            the salon in order that the employer can fulfil their reporting obligations 
                  Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 (COSHH) 
                  The COSHH regulations require that appropriate assessment and precaution is taken to 
                  protect against harm from hazardous substances.  
                   
                  In a salon environment this may include: 
                    •    Chemicals, such as those used for cleaning and products used for hair colouring etc. 
                    •    Biological agents, such as bacteria in spa areas (Jacuzzis) or in laundry facilities (when 
                         sterilising equipment)  
                    •    Naturally occurring substances, such as dust or mould in damper, humid areas e.g. 
                         Jacuzzi, steam rooms or even the salon itself 
                     It would also include substances produced during work activities, such as, 
                                 fumes from mixing of chemicals or electrical filing of nails 
                   
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                9 
                   
                  Some general guidelines are: 
                    •    All hazardous substances should be identified and the risk they present should be 
                         stratified.  
                    •    Precaution should be taken to minimise the risk, which may include the provision of 
                         protective clothing, e.g. use of gloves or face masks to prevent contact with the skin or 
                         inhalation.  
                    •    Exposure should be minimised. If the activity the chemical is used for is not essential, 
                         than it should be stopped; alternatively, if the activity is essential (e.g. cleaning), then 
                         the safer types of chemical or forms of the chemical should be used.  
                    •    Controls should be put in place. Staff should be trained to use chemicals, e.g. hair 
                         colouring and time spent in the environment with chemicals should be reduced. They 
                         should also be informed of the risks of being exposed to specific chemicals and 
                         involved in risk assessment. All chemicals should be stored safely and labelled. Any 
                         chemicals that offer greater danger should be kept in limited access areas.  
                    •    Review and monitor all systems and procedures. 
                  Employers must  
                  •    Assess the risk to health from hazardous products and decide what precautions are 
                       required. 
                  •    Introduce appropriate measures to control exposure to hazardous products. 
                  •    Ensure employees follow the control measures and safety precautions and use 
                       protective equipment when appropriate. 
                  •    Inform and instruct employees about the risks and precautions and train accordingly 
                       in dealing with, storing and disposing of hazardous products, e.g. aerosol hairsprays 
                       to be kept away from naked flames and heat sources.  
                  •    Attend appropriate training. 
                  •    Follow information and instruction on both hazardous and potentially hazardous 
                       chemicals used in the salon. E.g. the correct storage of hydrogen peroxide which is 
                       classed as hazardous 
                   
                  Personal Protective Equipment 2002 (PPE) 
                  PPE regulations require the provision of appropriate protective clothing and equipment.   
                   
                  In a salon environment, this may include the provision of:  
                    •    Trolleys to move products and minimise spillage 
                    •    Bowls for mixing products  
                    •    Gloves and masks when handling colorants and chemicals, e.g. hydrogen peroxide 
                    •    Plastic gowns and capes to protect the client  
                    •    Training for staff on how to use of equipment  
                  Any equipment used should be of an appropriate fit, be well maintained and stored correctly.  
                  NB: Appropriate personal protective equipment is explored in section 2.  
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               10 
                   
                  Manual Handling Operations Regulations (1992) 
                  The manual handling regulations govern the lifting or moving of any objects. The guidance 
                  stipulates that where practicable hazardous lifting should be eliminated, or if it cannot be 
                  eliminated then appropriate safety measures needed to be taken.  
                   
                  The specific safety measures would include:  
                    •    Risk assessment of all lifting and moving activities, e.g. storage of equipment, shelf 
                         height and placement of heavier boxes of lower shelves.  
                    •    The provision of staff training to inform lifting practices.  
                    •    The use of mechanical devices to lift objects that are very heavy 
                    •    The use of more than one lifter to share the load where appropriate 
                    •    The use of back supports 
                    •    Correcting lifting technique  
                   
                  Employers must  
                  •    Provide training in manual handling.  
                  •    Reduce the risk of injury for any tasks undertaken. 
                  •    Assess the working environment for risks, for example a pregnant staff member may 
                       not be able to lift heavy stock boxes from high shelves so items should be stored lower  
                                                                                                                                 
                  •    Take reasonable care and ensure others are not affected by their actions. 
                  •    Use equipment provided by an employer to enable staff to move or access heavy 
                       loads, e.g. an appropriate step ladder to access products or stock from high shelves. 
                  •    Follow the safe systems of work that an employer has provided, e.g. instructions not to 
                       climb on shelves to access product. 
                   
                  Correct lifting 
                  The following guidance is offered to inform correct lifting. 
                    •    Start with a stable base – feet apart  
                    •    Bend the knees and use the power of the legs to drive the lift.  
                    •    Keep the back upright and the abdominal muscles engaged to support the spine 
                    •    Keep the load close to the body to minimise the load on the spine  
                                                                                                              
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                               11 
        
       Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations (1981) 
       The first aid regulations are a key part of duty of care. Risk assessments should be carried 
       out to identify the level of first aid provision needed and everyone at work must be made 
       aware of first aid arrangements. The regulations require that there should be appropriate 
       facilities for first aid, e.g. first aid room, first aid boxes in appropriate locations and access to 
       the appropriate number of qualified first aiders (variable depending on the size of the 
       organization and likelihood of accidents occurring (risk assessment). A general guideline is 
       that one first aider should be present for every 50 people. In higher risk areas, this ratio may 
       need to be increased.  
        
        
         An appointed first aider must be in place at all times when people are working.  
        They would take charge when someone has a minor injury, e.g. burn or cut or if a 
                    medical emergency presents. 
        
        
                                                 
        
       Self-employed hair dressers or beauty therapists should ensure they are 
       qualified to provide first aid. 
        
                     
       © VTCT. 2016                              
                                                                                                                               12 
                   
                  Electricity at Work Regulations 
                  Electricity at Work Regulations requires an employer to ensure: 
                    •    All electrical equipment is checked by a competent person at least once a year and a 
                         Portable Appliance Test (P.A.T.) is conducted   
                    •    All checks are recorded and the equipment updated with appropriate P.A.T. tag   
                    •    Regular checks are carried out and records maintained including repairs to equipment   
                   
                  Electricity at Work Regulations requires an employee to ensure that: 
                    •    All equipment has been maintained and is safe to use, e.g. loose or frayed wires on a 
                         hairdryer or electric couch are unsafe and must be reported as unusable. 
                    •    Report and label any broken equipment to avoid it being used and potentially causing 
                         harm. 
                    •    Check temperatures and settings on equipment before switching on and using on the 
                         client 
                          
                  Self-employed hair dressers or beauty therapists should ensure the equipment  
                                 they use when providing service is appropriately checked. 
                   
                  The Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005 
                  Key guidelines of this Act require that: 
                    •    Exit routes are clearly signposted and illuminated. 
                    •    There is a fire alarm raising point. 
                    •    There is adequate firefighting equipment. 
                    •    Extinguishers are serviced regularly. 
                    •    Evacuation routes and assembly points are clearly visible in each room. 
                    •    Fire drills are carried out regularly. 
                   
                  Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) 
                  The Disclosure and Barring Service ensures that organizations have access to any criminal 
                  records of potential employees, so that informed choices can be made regarding the 
                  employment of staff. This is especially important for staff who will be working with or who 
                  may have contact with children and vulnerable adults.  
                   
                  Employers will require DBS checks as part of their recruitment process and both employer 
                  and employee will receive a DBS certificate once the appropriate checks have been made.  
                   
                  Further information of DBS is available from: https://www.gov.uk/dbs-check-requests-
                  guidance-for-employers  
                   
                  Any organisation or employer who knowingly appoints an individual who is banned from 
                  working with children or vulnerable people can be prosecuted; as can the individual. 
                   
                   
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               13 
                   
                  Employers’ Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969 
                  This act requires all employers to hold insurance to cover accidents and ill health. The 
                  insurance should be appropriate for the number of staff employed and the insurance policy 
                  should be displayed.  
                   
                  The Data Protection Act (1988 and 2003) 
                  This Act was developed to protect personal information and an individual’s right to 
                  confidentiality. It offers guidance on how client records and information should be recorded, 
                  stored and maintained.  
                   
                  Key guidelines include: 
                    •    Information should not be disclosed to any third party.  
                    •    Information sharing is only allowed for legal reasons or for client protection (e.g. 
                         referral) 
                    •    Client consent should be gained prior to disclosing information.  
                    •    All records should be stored securely (locked cabinet or secure password for electronic 
                         record). 
                    •    Dispose of records appropriately – shredding or burning.  
                    •    Maintain records for appropriate time frame.  
                    •    All data and records should be: 
                                   used fairly and lawfully 
                                   used for limited, specifically stated purposes 
                                   used in a way that is adequate, relevant and not excessive 
                                   accurate 
                                   kept for no longer than is absolutely necessary 
                                   handled according to people’s data protection rights 
                                   kept safe and secure 
                                   not transferred outside the UK without adequate protection 
                   
                  Further information on the DPA is available from: https://www.gov.uk/data-protection/the-
                  data-protection-act 
                   
                  Regulatory bodies  
                  These are organisations recognised by government with health and safety responsibilities.  
                  They include: 
                    •    Health and Safety Executive (HSE) – overall responsibility for regulation of health and 
                         safety  
                    •    Local authorities – workplace inspection, employer guidance, investigation of 
                         complaints or accident, partnership working to promote safe practice. Work in 
                         collaboration with the health and safety commission (HSC) 
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               14 
                   
                  Duty of care – responsibilities and role boundaries  
                  Duty of care – all people have a ‘duty of care’ to anyone who may be affected by their 
                  activities or services. This includes employed and self-employed (mobile) hair dressers, 
                  barbers or beauty therapists.  
                   
                  Law of tort 
                  This relates to civil proceedings rather than criminal proceedings. It can be defined as a 
                  body of rights, obligations and solutions applied by courts to provide relief for victims 
                  (claimant) who have suffered harm from the wrongful or negligent acts of others (defendant). 
                                                                           
                                        Negligence – when ‘duty of care’ has not been met. 
                                                                           
                  Insurance  
                  All professional hair dressers, barbers and beauty therapists should hold their own 
                  insurance. This would be in additional to any employer insurance.  
                    •    Professional Indemnity Insurance (Professional Liability Insurance) – This 
                         insurance provides protection for negligent advice, slander/libel, loss of client data, 
                         error of judgement etc. or negligent advice or services or malpractice. It covers legal 
                         expenses and compensation for the claimant. 
                    •    Public liability insurance – This insurance covers injury to a person or the damage of 
                         loss of their personal property whilst using a service.   
                   
                  Occupier’s liability Act (1957) and greater duty of care 
                  The requirements of this Act were that any business allowing other people onto the 
                  premises, have a ‘duty of care’ to those people.  
                   
                  Greater duty of care  
                  Children, young people and vulnerable adults are likely to be less mindful of risks in the 
                  workplace and will need greater duty of care and supervision.  
                   
                  Greater duty of care may also be extended to clients undergoing special physiological 
                  lifespan processes, e.g. older adults, ante and postnatal women. 
                   
                  Key guidelines for maintaining duty of care: 
                    •    Risk assess all services and areas  
                    •    Eliminate any potential for harm or loss 
                    •    Ensure individuals are aware of any potential risks, e.g. skin testing before use of hair 
                         colourants 
                    •    Maintain appropriate client records  
                    •    Maintain records of all client treatments, including products used  
                    •    Ensure safe practices in all working activities  
                    •    Maintain adequate insurance  
                    •    Hold a first aid qualification  
                    •    Only work in areas of competence and where qualified and maintain continuing 
                         professional development (CPD) 
                    •    Adhere to safety guidelines and rules 
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               15 
                   
                  The roles of the individuals responsible for health and safety  
                  In any organisation, everyone has some level of responsibility for health and safety – the 
                  employer, all staff and also service users.  
                  Health and safety officers – large organisations usually appoint a health and safety officer 
                  who is responsible for monitoring and managing overall health and safety.  
                   
                  They would be responsible for: 
                    •    Reviewing and updating organisational health and safety policy and procedures. 
                    •    Maintaining and reviewing risk assessments. 
                    •    Providing staff training. 
                    •    Reporting to the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) the regulatory body for health and 
                         safety who Inspect and review an organisation’s procedures and practice. 
                    •    Ensuring appropriate staff welfare facilities.  
                   
                  Hairdressers, barbers and beauty therapists  
                  They are responsible for: 
                    •    Following policies and procedures and specific codes of conduct  
                    •    Equipment and facility checks and completing risk assessments 
                    •    Ensuring equipment that needs service or maintenance is reported. 
                    •    Ensuring client safety  
                    •    Awareness of all emergency telephones, exits, nearest telephone and first aid kit and 
                         duty first aider, location of incident reporting book 
                   
                  Security officers – large organisations may also appoint security officers to ensure 
                  buildings are secure and protected.  
                   
                  Security procedures  
                  The following security procedures may apply: 
                    •    Use of membership cards or electronic passwords to enable access to spas 
                    •    Signing in books for guests and visitors in spas and large salons 
                    •    CCTV to view public areas, such as car parks, all main entrances and exits. 
                    •    Procedures for opening and closing, including personal safety  
                    •    Procedures for safe and secure handling of finances, e.g. safety deposit boxes  
                    •    Fire alarm testing  
                    •    Fire and evacuation procedures  
                    •    Lockers for staff to secure personal belongings for staff and/or clients 
                    •    Locked doors to restricted access areas, including those where chemical products are 
                         stored. 
                    •    Secure storage of client data, e.g. locked cabinets and password protected computers  
                   
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               16 
                   
                  Staff welfare  
                  Staff welfare is of paramount importance. There are various factors that may affect welfare.  
                   
                  Employers must provide: 
                    •    Adequate toilets that are clean, ventilated and well lit 
                    •    Washing facilities with hot and cold water 
                    •    Drinking water 
                    •    Facilities for rest breaks 
                    •    Facilities for storing clothing 
                    •    Changing facilities if necessary. 
                    •    Suitable rest facilities for pregnant women 
                    •    Smoking policies - restrictions and/or bans to protect non-smokers   
                    •    Stress management reduction – being considerate to possible causes and taking 
                         appropriate action   
                    •    Policies and procedures to protect against harassment and bullying with appropriate 
                         disciplinary procedures.  
                    •    Policies regarding the use of alcohol/drugs as these issues jeopardise safety by 
                         affecting a person’s judgement   
                   
                  Key health and safety documents  
                  The key health and safety documents include: 
                       •   Health and safety policy  
                       •   Emergency action plan procedures, e.g. evacuation 
                       •   Employers insurance  
                       •   Risk assessment records 
                       •   Equipment service and maintenance records  
                       •   Accident and incident report book  
                       •   Client records, including emergency contact details  
                       •   Staff records – DBS, application information, copies of certificates, record of 
                           continuing professional development (CPD)  
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                          17 
              
             Section 2: Maintaining health and safety requirements within the salon   
              
             The purpose of health and safety requirements within the salon:      
              
             Health and safety regulations must be adhered to in the salon to maintain high standards of 
             practice, safety and protection of themselves and the client.  
              
                 One aspect of health and safety responsibility would be ensuring continuous 
                   professional development is maintained to keep up to date with changes  
                                     or new product usage information. 
              
             The importance of working safely and hygienically within a salon: 
             Stylists and therapists must work safely at all times and adhere to all health and safety 
             legislation within the salon.  
              
             Responsibilities would include: 
               •  Work hygienically with the use of clean towels, sterilised tools and equipment  
               •  Follow workplace and suppliers’ or manufacturers’ instructions for the safe use of 
                  equipment, materials and products  
               •  Prepare and protect self, client and service area in accordance with salon requirements  
               •  Use appropriate personal protective equipment for self and client, e.g. the client’s own 
                  clothes must be fully protected with gown and towels  
               •  Remain alert to risks and hazards throughout the service and understand how this may 
                  affect services – spillages, obstacles, obstructions, broken equipment and trailing wires   
                  Adopt correct posture of self/client to avoid fatigue and minimise injury  
               •  Ensure that the service area is clean and tidy throughout the service   
               •  Proceed with the service without causing danger or damage to self, client or work area 
                  Adopt the correct methods of waste disposal – dilute chemicals with running water, 
                  recycling and environmental protection  
               •  Prevent contact dermatitis – wear gloves when using chemicals, wash and dry hands 
                  thoroughly and use moisturiser/barrier cream   
                   
             © VTCT. 2016                                                                    
                                                                                                                               18 
                   
                                                                                                                           
                                                                           
                  The procedure for risk assessment 
                  The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations (1999) made risk assessment a 
                  legal requirement. All staff, whether employed or self-employed have a responsibility to 
                  assess their working areas and identify hazards and evaluate any potential risk of harm the 
                  hazards may cause to themselves, their work colleagues and members of the public. 
                   
                  A risk assessment must be carried out in a workplace at regular intervals. All staff and 
                  visitors to a salon have a right to be protected from harm. An examination of the work area is 
                  carried out on what might cause harm and a decision made on whether reasonable steps to 
                  prevent that harm are in place 
                     
                    •    A hazard is anything that may cause harm and presents a risk to safety, such as: use 
                         of electricity, the trailing wires from hair dryers or beauty equipment, the use of 
                         chemicals, spilt products, e.g. shampoo or massage oil, lifting or moving heavy objects 
                         or working with hot equipment e.g. hair straighteners or a wax heater 
                    •    Risk is the likelihood that someone may be harmed by the identified hazard with an 
                         indication of the severity of harm that may be caused, such as: the hairdresser, beauty 
                         therapist or a client tripping over trailing wires, slipping on any spillage or be burnt from 
                         electrical appliances or wax.  
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               19 
                   
                  Potential hazards in a salon environment 
                  In any salon environment, there are a number of potential hazards. 
                   
                                    •    Floor surfaces – these need to be swept regularly and clean, e.g. hair 
                                         removed and any spilled substances mopped up. The work area must 
                                         be kept free of clutter and chairs, trolley etc., placed back into position 
                                         for safety 
                                    •    Temperature in the environment – may be too hot or too cold; if too 
                                         hot, there may be the potential for hyperthermia and dehydration, 
                  Facilities             leading to fainting, can also effect the efficiency of some product usage 
                                         services  
                                    •    Fire exits – these need to be clearly signed and accessible.   
                                    •    Fire extinguishers – these need to be appropriate to serve the area in 
                                         which they are located; they must be regularly maintained and staff 
                                         should be instructed on their use.  
                                    •    Safety signs used when appropriate, e.g. wet floor  
                                    •    Manual handling – when lifting or moving equipment 
                                    •    Broken equipment – this should be removed and labelled as ‘out of 
                                         use’ 
                                    •    Improper technical use – all equipment should be used correctly and 
                  Equipment              only for its’ specific purpose  
                                    •    Maintenance – equipment should be regularly maintained 
                                    •    Chemicals – safe storage, safe use and safe mixing 
                                    •    Electrical equipment – no trailing wires or trip hazards; turned on only 
                                         when required and turned off and stored correctly when not in use  
                                    •    Signing in book - to log all visitors and guests using a salon or spa 
                                    •    Secure entrances and exits to prevent unauthorized access 
                  Security          •    Lockers to maintain security and prevent theft 
                                    •    Suspicious parcels should be alerted to emergency services and 
                                         facility evacuated  
                                    •    Use of showers before using spa to prevent any cross-infection, e.g. 
                  Hygiene                bacteria and chemicals (deodorant and perfumes) 
                                    •    Use of protective clothing to deal with hazardous substances to 
                                         prevent contact with the skin or inhalation  
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                               20 
        
       Assessing risk  
       Risk assessment can be used to minimise any potential risk of harm through accidents. It 
       may be informal or formal.  
        
          Informal risk assessment would include a visual inspection and appraisal of 
          possible hazards in all work areas prior to use. Any new risks identified would need 
          to be recorded formally.  
           
          Formal risk assessment would include the completion of a written risk assessment 
          form to identify the hazards and the likelihood and severity of harm and ensure 
          appropriate control measures are in place to prevent accidents. Formal risk 
          assessment reports should be reviewed and updated regularly.  
        
       The purpose of risk assessment is to ensure as far is reasonably practicable, that all 
           steps have been taken to minimise the risk to the safest possible level. 
        
       The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) provide five simple steps for assessing and 
       managing risk: 
       1.  Identify the hazards (anything that may cause harm) 
       2.  Determine who may be harmed  
       3.  Evaluate the level of risk (likelihood and severity) and decide on precautions needed  
       4.  Record all findings  
       5.  Review and update regularly  
        
       Further information on risk assessment is available from the HSE: 
       http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/controlling-risks.htm.  
        
       Identify hazards  
       Hazards are anything that may cause harm – products, tools, equipment, environment, 
       clothing, people etc. 
        
       Activity.  
       Make a list of some of potential hazards in the salon environment.   
        
                     
       © VTCT. 2016                              
                                                                                                                               21 
                   
                  Who may be at risk of harm? 
                  Individuals who may be at risk of harm from hazards may include:  
                    •    Hair stylists or barbers  
                    •    Beauty therapists  
                    •    Clients  
                    •    Visitors 
                    •    Guests 
                    •    External work contractors 
                    •    Cleaner 
                    •    Other staff 
                   
                  Level of risk  
                  One method of grading risks is to consider the likelihood of it occurring and the severity of 
                  harm it may cause and grading these using a scale from 1 to 5 to represent – low – 
                  moderate – high or very high risk presented.  
                   
                                       3                                          Level of harm caused 
                                       1                                        Minor injury – a near miss 
                                       2                                        First aid and back to work 
                                       3                                   Out of action for a few days (>3) 
                                       4                                          Major injury or disease 
                                       5                                                     Death 
                   
                                       3                                       Likelihood of risk occurring 
                                       1                                           Highly unlikely – 2% 
                                       2                                                 Likely – 5%  
                                       3                                              Possible – 10%  
                                       4                                          Almost certain – 25% 
                                       5                                               Certain – 50% 
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           22 
                 
                Risk rating  
                The level of harm score (severity) and the likelihood of harm score are multiplied together to 
                give the risk rating and can help to identify the level of control required.  
                 
                Score      Rating           Description of risk   Control and action  
                 1 – 2          LOW              Acceptable          No further action required  
                                                                     Maintain existing controls. 
                 3 - 10       MEDIUM              Tolerable          May require some action to reduce 
                                                                     risk further. 
                                                                     Stop and revaluate controls. 
                11 – 25        HIGH                Danger            Must be followed up with 
                                                                     immediate action to reduce the 
                                                                     risk. 
                                                                     Eliminate! 
                  26 +      VERY HIGH        High level of danger    Should be eliminated, where 
                                                                     possible. 
                 
                For example:  
                Client                   Likelihood    Level of    Score   Rating   Action  
                                                       harm  
                A client with no                                                      Patch/skin test for 
                allergies having a                                                    safety check.  
                negative response             2            4          4       Low 
                to the use of specific                                                 
                services or                                                           Observe reaction.  
                treatments  
                A client with                                                         Patch/skin test for 
                sensitivities or                                                      safety check.  
                allergies having a                                                     
                negative response             4            4         16      High     No service or 
                to use specific                                                       treatment if 
                products                                                              reactions 
                                                                                      observed.  
                 
                Activities: 
                1: Make a list of potential types of services or treatments that may require a 
                patch/skin test 
                2: Make a list of the types of products that may cause an allergic reaction 
                 
                © VTCT. 2016                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     23 
                  
                 Risk management and control 
                 The mnemonic (learning technique that aids information retention) ERICP offers a way for 
                 managing and controlling risks. 
                  
                                                                                 •   Not lifting a heavy objects 
                                                                                     alone  
                  E  Eliminate              Where possible, aim to               •   Patch/Skin testing clients 
                                            eliminate the risk                       before using salon 
                                                                                     services/treatments 
                                            If the risk cannot be                •   Requesting help to lift a 
                  R  Reduce                 eliminated, take action and 
                                            put controls in place to                 heavy object  
                                            reduce the risk 
                                                                                 •   Storing chemicals in 
                                                                                     restricted access 
                   I    Isolate             Isolate the risk to minimise             locations 
                                            exposure                             •   Use of signs to restrict 
                                                                                     access 
                                                                                 •   Staff training for manual 
                                                                                     handling  
                                                                                 •   Evacuation practice 
                  C  Control                Put controls in place                •   Fire extinguishers in 
                                                                                     higher risk location  
                                                                                 •   Reporting procedures to 
                                                                                     manage risk.  
                  P  Protective             Supply and wear protective           •   Using gloves and masks 
                        clothing            clothing                                 when handling chemical 
                  
                                                   
                 © VTCT. 2016                                                                                           
                                                                                                   24 
               
              Controlling risks  
              There are many ways of controlling and managing potential risks in a salon environment.  
               
              Area of risk          Risk management and controls 
                                    •   Cleaning and maintenance schedule in place. 
                                    •   Know location of fire exits and ensure clearly signed and 
                                        no obstructions. 
                                    •   Know location of fire extinguishers. 
              Facilities            •   Ensure appropriate storage of flammable products. 
                                    •   Qualified first aider on duty.  
                                    •   Replenished first aid kit, location of nearest first aid kit. 
                                    •   Follow organisational procedure for medical emergencies 
                                        and fire. 
                                    •   Appropriate layout and spacing around salon equipment.  
                                    •   Appropriate service and maintenance schedule 
                                        undertaken and recorded. 
              Equipment             •   Check wires on electrical equipment.  
                                    •   Out of order equipment clearly marked. 
                                    •   Correct lifting and moving of equipment – set up, during 
                                        use and post-use.  
                                    •   Patch/Skin testing before specific salon 
                                        services/treatments 
                                    •   Ensure correct lifting and handling technique when 
              Working                   moving equipment. 
              practices             •   Wearing appropriate protective equipment, e.g. gloves, 
                                        apron. 
                                    •   Using appropriate methods to sterilize or disinfect 
                                        equipment.  
                                    •   Ensure appropriate surveillance equipment, e.g. CCTV in 
                                        remote or high risk areas.  
                                    •   Alarm system operational 
              Security              •   All main areas fully staffed, e.g. reception, car park  
                                    •   Safety deposit boxes with takings placed in a locked 
                                        room. 
                                    •   Secure storage for client records  
               
               
                                           
              © VTCT. 2016                                                                             
                                               25 
        
       Recording and reporting risks  
       All risks should be reported using a formal risk assessment record. They should be reported 
       to the person responsible for health and safety, which may be an appointed health and 
       safety officer or a manager. Staff who may be affected would also need to be aware of the 
       risk, e.g. hair stylists, barbers, beauty therapists.  
        
       Risk assessment records would need to be available for inspection by the local authority or 
       health and safety executive. There also needs to be evidence that these records are 
       regularly reviewed and updated.  
        
         When a risk cannot be controlled personally, it should be immediately reported  
                  to a manager or health and safety officer. 
        
       Risk assessment activity 
       Read the case studies, then for each: 
       1.  List the hazards.  
       2.  Identify who may be harmed. 
       3.  Identify the level of harm and likelihood. 
       4.  What immediate action can be taken to reduce the risks? 
       5.  What future actions are required?  
       6.  Who would be responsible for implementing the actions?  
        
       Case study 1. Hair  
       One stylist has completed an intense quasi vibrant red colour on their client. The 
       client has additionally had a complete restyle to compliment the new colour.  
       The stylist has mixed the colour in the dispensary alongside some freshly 
       laundered white shampooing towels.  The whole tube of colour was not required 
       and whilst mixing the stylist became distracted when answering a question from 
       another colleague leaving the cap off the tube of colour. 
       Once the colour was applied, the stylist removed the gloves and left then on top of 
       the work area – ready to re-use when checking the development of the colour. The 
       unused colour is left on the trolley in case it was needed. 
       The stylist reused the gloves to test the hair colour development and kept them on 
       taking the client to the wash basin to remove the colour. 
       Once the colour was removed the stylist disposed of the gloves and outer towel 
       that was protecting the gown and client’s clothes in the sink. The client was taken 
       to the work area with hair dripping and a cutting collar attached. The trolley still 
       contained the unused colour bowl, with cutting and blow drying tools alongside 
       ready for use. 
       The hair was restyled and blow dried, it had been a busy morning for the stylist.  
       The stylist then took a lunch break. 
        
       © VTCT. 2016                              
                                                                                                                               26 
                   
                  Case study 2. Beauty  
                  On a hot sunny day Mrs Bell arrives for treatment at her local salon. The front door 
                  has been left wide open to help cool the salon, and the fire exit at the back of the 
                  building has been propped open with the fire extinguisher to allow for a through 
                  draft. The salon is of modest size with 6 treatment rooms but all manicure/pedicure 
                  treatments are conducted in an area just to the side of reception, front of house.  
                  The head therapist is finishing up tidying away the still full pedicure soaking bowl 
                  and the nail technician next to her is setting up for gel nails and is plugging in her 
                  LED lamp into an extension cord that reaches across the pedicure area. Some 
                  clients are waiting to pay and others are arriving into the small reception area.  
                  The receptionist is paying more attention to the arriving clients than the clients 
                  waiting to pay, causing the area to become congested and the clients moving into 
                  the manicure/pedicure area to wait. After greeted Mrs Bell and directed her to the 
                  waiting area, the receptionist immediately follows to offer refreshments. Mrs Bell 
                  requests a cup of coffee and the receptionist leaves reception to fetch it. Mrs Bell 
                  notices the receptionist is wearing flip flops. On her way to get the coffee, the 
                  receptionist offers to take the full pedicure bowl, stretching to reaching across the 
                  gel nail station to take it, she laughs at the weight.  
                  The nail technician askes the receptionist to bring back her sterilized metal tools 
                  from the cabinet on her return, along with a glass of water. Mrs Bell notices the 
                  receptionist leave the pedicure bowl on a trolley in front of the fire exit to deal with 
                  after she has sorted the refreshments.  
                   
                  The types of accidents and emergencies that can happen in a salon 
                  environment. 
                  There are different types of emergency that may occur in a salon environment. These can 
                  generally be grouped as: 
                    •    Accidents – which include those caused by slips, trips or falls, such as mild sprains or 
                         cuts to the skin; or accidents from using products or equipment, such as: electric 
                         shock, burn or scald from electrical items, inhalation of products. 
                                                Most accidents can usually be handled and dealt with  
                                                                      by a duty first aider 
                                     
                                     
                    •    Medical emergencies – which include those brought on by underlying medical 
                         conditions or allergies, e.g. asthma attack, epileptic seizure, angina, hyperglycaemia or 
                         hypoglycaemia.   
                                         Medical emergencies will nearly always require the involvement  
                                                       of the ambulance and paramedic services 
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               27 
                   
                    •    Fire – building, electrical equipment, flammable products  
                                                Fire emergencies will always require the involvement  
                                                                       of the fire services 
                            
                    •    Security and safety alerts, which may include: breaking and entering the building; 
                         theft of items; suspicious items or parcels; chemical spillage; fire; missing persons, 
                         abuse or vulnerable persons. 
                                  Security and safety alerts will require the involvement of more than one 
                                     emergency services, such as the police, ambulance and paramedic  
                                              fire services, bomb disposal team etc., and which may  
                                                           require evacuation from a building 
                   
                       Accidental injuries                   Medical emergencies                      Security alerts and 
                                                                                                      other emergencies 
                   • Burns                                 • Asthma attack                        •Fire 
                   • Minor cuts and bleeding               • Dizziness                            •Gas escape 
                   • Joint strains                         • Fainting                             •Chemical spillage
                   • Muscle sprains                        • Epileptic seizure                    •Bomb alert 
                   • Bumps and bruising                    • Dehydration                          •Missing person 
                   • Fractures or breaks                   • Hyperthermia                         •Aggressive confrontation
                   • Back injuries                         • Hypothermia                          •Breaking and entering
                                                           • Loss of consciousness                •Theft 
                                                           • Heart attack  
                                                           • Angina 
                                                           • Hyperglycaemia
                                                           • Hypoglycaemia
                                                                                                                                     
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                28 
                 
                The roles of staff and external services during an emergency 
                The specific type of emergency or accident will determine which staff and external services 
                need to be involved. The environment where activities are taking place will also affect 
                involvement.  
                 
                For example, in a salon there are often a range of other people who can offer help and 
                support, such as calling for help and providing first aid; whereas, in a client’s home, one 
                person (the mobile stylist or therapist) may have to take on a number of roles to manage an 
                emergency situation. 
                 
                All staff, including     Deal with situation when it arises within limits of own 
                hair stylists,           responsibility. Call for help, if required.   
                barbers and              Raise alarm, if required.  
                beauty therapists        Report emergency and complete incident report form  
                                         Contact emergency services. 
                Receptionist             Contact duty manager and duty first aider as required. 
                                         Meet and direct emergency services to location 
                                         Complete incident report form according to organization 
                Duty manager             requirements. 
                                         Overall responsibility for managing health and safety.  
                First aider or           Deal with first aid accidents and emergencies 
                appointed person  
                Paramedic                Treat medical emergencies 
                Police                   Investigate missing person, theft of belongings, security 
                                         issues, abuse (verbal or physical) 
                Fire Service             Deal with fire emergencies - Investigate, resolve and make 
                                         safe  
                 
                    During an emergency situation, it is important to follow appropriate procedures  
                             to provide support and assistance to others (where appropriate)  
                                        as well as maintaining own personal safety. 
                 
                                                 
                © VTCT. 2016                                                                                        
                                                                                                                               29 
                   
                  Ergonomics to prevent work related complaints:  
                  Safety of hair stylists and beauty therapists while at work is also essential! 
                   
                  Some considerations for ensuring appropriate working conditions and practices would 
                  include: 
                    •    Adjustable features, e.g. seat and couch height adjustment   
                    •    Back rests and foot rests if needed   
                    •    Appropriate room for movement  
                    •    Reduced noise distractions, e.g. volume of background music  
                    •    Appropriate consideration to risks of using display screens    
                    •    Provision of staff training, e.g. awareness of the problems associated with poor posture 
                         and safety precautions associated with specific treatments   
                    •    Avoidance of over-reaching and stooping   
                    •    Minimising potential for repetitive movements, e.g. considering treatment rotation   
                    •    Adequate breaks for staff   
                    •    Reducing stress levels, stress can lead to poor posture   
                    •    Making environmental improvements – heating in cold areas, ventilation where 
                         necessary   
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              30 
                 
                The importance of personal protective equipment  
                Using the correct personal protective equipment (PPE) is essential for all salon services to 
                maintain health and hygiene to the client and the stylist or therapist.    
                 
                The consequences of inadequate client protection during salon services may result in legal 
                proceedings (negligence), where the client has the potential grounds to sue or claim against 
                the salon for replacement of damage to themselves of their property, e.g. clothes. 
                 
                Service or                       PPE 
                Treatment            •   Hair dresser/barber                   Examples/reasons 
                                     •   Client 
                                     Gloves  
                Shampoo and                                        Prevent the client’s clothes from getting 
                conditioning                                       wet whilst at a back basin 
                                     Gown, plastic cape, towel 
                                     Closed toed shoe              Prevent hair entering feet and causing 
                Cutting/blow-                                      infection   
                drying/setting and                                 Preventative measure for accidental 
                dressing             Gown, towel, cutting collar   dropping of products and/or equipment 
                                                                   causing injury 
                                     Gloves and apron              Prevents staining of clothes and hands   
                                                                   Gloves also add protection against 
                                     Optional: Face mask,          possible contact dermatitis/chemical 
                                     goggles                       damage to hands   
                Colouring,                                         Individuals who suffer from allergies or 
                bleaching                                          asthma should wear a mask to prevent 
                                                                   chemical inhalation    
                                                                   In extreme cases of effects from 
                                     Gown, plastic cape, towel,    inhalation of products, eye protectors 
                                     barrier cream                 should be worn, particularly bleaching 
                                                                   powders to prevent further respiratory 
                                                                   problems 
                                     Gloves and apron              Specifically to avoid contact with 
                Perming,                                           perming or relaxing agent on hands and 
                Chemical relaxing   Gown, plastic cape, towel,     to prevent product staining on 
                                     barrier cream, cotton wool    uniform/clothes 
                                     Optional: gloves              Gloves to prevent chemical contact with 
                Hair extensions                                    hands, specifically when glue is used 
                                     Gown, towel   
                                                
                © VTCT. 2016                                                                                     
                                                                                                   31 
               
                                  Gloves and aprons          An apron to protect the therapist’s 
                                                             uniform and gloves for hygiene reasons 
                                  Optional: goggles or safety  during any stages of any treatment 
              General ‘small      glasses                    where cross infection is a risk.  
              risk’ Level 3                                  Goggles/safety glasses should be 
              beauty treatments                              available to protect both the therapist 
                                  Optional: goggles or safety  and client’s eyes when necessary in 
                                  glasses                    certain treatments where this is a risk of 
                                                             particles entering the eyes 
                                  Gloves                     Gloves to protect the therapist and client 
              Epilation                                      from cross-infection   
                                  N/A 
                                  Thermal glove/slotted      Gloves to protect the therapist’s skin 
                                  spoon                      from high temperatures of warm stones.  
              Stone Therapy                                  A towel to act as a barrier protecting the 
                                  Towel                      client’s skin from direct contact with 
                                                             warm placement stones 
                                  Protective clothing, face  An apron/protective clothing to protect 
                                  mask, gloves, goggles or   the therapist’s uniform and protective 
                                  safety glasses             clothing for the client’s clothes.  
              Air brush                                      Gloves for hygiene precautions and also 
              treatments                                     to protect the skin from the products.  
                                  Protective clothing, face 
                                  mask, goggles or safety    Goggles or safety glasses to protect the 
                                  glasses                    eyes (if applicable) and masks to protect 
                                                             from inhalation   
                                  Gloves, apron              Gloves to prevent contact with the skin 
                                                             when glue is used.  
              Eyelash                                        An apron to protect the therapist’s 
              extensions                                     clothes and a headband to protect 
                                  Headband (optional)        client’s hair if required.  
                                  Towel                      A towel should be used to protect the 
                                                             client’s clothes in the immediate area 
                                  Gloves, goggles or safety  Gloves for hygiene reasons and to 
                                  glasses                    prevent contact between any 
              UV Gel                                         irritants/chemicals and the skin. An 
                                  Goggles/safety glasses     apron will protect the therapist’s clothes  
                                   
                                           
              © VTCT. 2016                                                                             
                                                                                                                                32 
                   
                                                                              Gloves as a hygiene precaution and also 
                                           Disposable gloves, apron,          to protect the therapist’s skin from tan 
                                           mask                               staining during application.  
                                                                              An apron will protect the uniform and a 
                                                                              mask to prevent inhalation.  
                  Spray tanning                                               The client needs hair protection in the 
                                           Headband/cap, disposable  form of a cap/headband and disposable 
                                           underwear, eye goggles,            underwear must be available plus 
                                           nose plugs (optional) for          disposable foot protectors.  
                                           the client                         Goggles and nose plugs should be 
                                                                              optional too for the client  
                                                                              Gloves as a hygiene precaution and also 
                                           Disposable gloves, apron           to protect the therapist’s skin from tan 
                                                                              staining during application.  
                  Manual tanning                                              An apron will protect the therapist’s 
                                                                              uniform.  
                                           Headband/cap, disposable  The client needs hair protection in the 
                                           underwear                          form of a cap/headband and disposable 
                                                                              underwear must be available  
                                           Gloves, apron                      Gloves to protect the therapist’s skin and 
                                                                              an apron to protect the uniform.  
                  Waxing                                                      A gown should be available for the client 
                                           Gown, towels/disposable            plus towels and disposable couch roll to 
                                           couch roll                         protect the client’s clothes and work 
                                                                              area  
                                           Gloves, apron, safety              Gloves for hygiene reasons and to 
                                           glasses or goggles, dust           protect the therapist’s skin.  
                  Electrical filing for    mask  
                  nails                                                       Safety glasses/goggles will protect both 
                                           Safety glasses or goggles,  the therapist’s and client’s eyes and a 
                                           dust mask                          dust mask should be available for both 
                                                                              to avoid inhaling dust  
                  Style and fit            Gloves, apron                      Gloves to protect the therapist’s skin and 
                  postiche                                                    an apron to protect clothing 
                                           N/A 
                   
                   
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                               33 
                   
                  The importance of good personal presentation 
                  Personal appearance should combine safety and professionalism to avoid accidents and 
                  give a positive professional image of a salon.  
                   
                  Consideration should be given to: 
                    •    The importance of personal appearance, e.g. to be clean, hygienic and in accepted 
                         uniform/clothes  
                    •    The avoidance of wearing obtrusive jewellery which may be a hazard   
                    •    Always wearing correct protective clothing   
                    •    Having a high standard of personal cleanliness and hygiene, e.g.  
                                   Tidy hair and nails  
                                   Covering cuts and open wounds   
                   
                  The importance of preventing cross-infection and cross-infestation 
                  To prevent cross-infection and cross-infestation within the salon environment, sterilisation of 
                  all tools and equipment must be undertaken to ensure complete destruction of any living 
                  micro-organisms.  
                   
                  This is important to ensure the image and reputation of the salon is maintained. Without 
                  sufficient attention there is the risk of potential threat to health and the potential loss of 
                  business and reputation of the business.   
                   
                             Legal action may be taken against individuals or against the business 
                   
                  Stylists, barbers and therapists must know how to use the sterilisation equipment within the 
                  salon, e.g. sterilisation fluids, ultra-violet cabinet, autoclave and cleaning detergents.  
                   
                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                          
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               34 
                   
                  Sterilisation and disinfecting methods used in salons  
                  Tools, equipment and work surfaces must be kept clean, well maintained and sterilised or 
                  disinfected.   
                   
                  Sterilisation and disinfecting will prevent cross-infection/contamination.  
                    •    Sterilisation – the killing of organisms such as bacteria, fungi and parasites   
                    •    Disinfecting –  the elimination of the most harmful microorganisms (not including their 
                         spores) from surfaces or objects   
                   
                  Cleaning/sterilisation   Tools                              Use/Instructions   
                                              Metal tools for hair or         Steam is used at high temperatures to 
                                              beauty, e.g. scissors,          sterilise equipment. Tools/equipment 
                  Autoclave                   tweezers  cuticle               usually take 20 minutes to sterilise; 
                                              knife/cuticle nippers           autoclaves are not suitable for wooden 
                                                                              handled tools 
                                                                              Mostly used in chemical jars, a solution 
                                              Scissors, tweezers etc,         is made following manufacturers’ 
                  Chemical sterilisers        combs, brushes,                 instructions.   
                                              sectioning clips                Tools are submerged for 20 minutes to 
                                                                              be fully sterilised 
                                                                              Ultra-violet rays sterilise tools, turn tools 
                  Ultra-violet cabinet        All tools                       after 20 minutes to ensure both sides 
                                                                              are fully sterilised 
                  Moist heat                  Towels, gowns                   Hot cycle on washing machine used to 
                                                                              kill bacteria and clean effectively 
                                                                              Must be used at correct concentrations 
                  Cleaning detergents         Work surfaces                   and  is used mostly to decontaminate 
                                                                              surfaces and air    
                   
                                                                                                                                                         
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               35 
                   
                  The importance of following emergency procedures calmly and correctly 
                  During any emergency situation, it is important to follow clearly outlined standard or normal 
                  operating procedures (SOPs or NOPs).  
                   
                  This may include procedures for: 
                    •    Dealing with accidents and first aid emergencies  
                    •    Contacting the emergency services and emergency contacts  
                    •    Administering first aid  
                    •    Dealing with a missing person  
                    •    Dealing with a fire, chemical spillage or unidentified parcel  
                    •    Managing a security alert and evacuation 
                    •    Recording and reporting any accident or incident  
                   
                  All salons will have their own written procedures. Individuals working in other environments, 
                  e.g. such as mobile stylists or therapists working in a client’s home, should develop their own 
                  set of procedures that they will adhere to in the event of an emergency.  
                   
                                   In any emergency situation, it is important to follow standard  
                                          or normal operating procedures (SOPs or NOPs). 
                   
                  Following the correct operational procedures in an emergency situation will: 
                    •    Prevent panic or alarm  
                    •    Ensure the emergency is handled effectively 
                    •    Minimise harm to anyone involved  
                    •    Maximize safety of anyone involved  
                    •    Ensure legislative guidance in followed  
                    •    Enable appropriate and detailed reporting and recording  
                    •    Ensure the emergency is resolved with maximal effectiveness – e.g. all staff know their 
                         role and duties.  
                                                                           
                               It is a legal responsibility to do everything ‘reasonably practicable’  
                                                 to keep people safe and prevent harm. 
                   
                   
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                               36 
                 
                Managing emergency situations 
                An outline of the procedures to follow when managing emergency situations are to: 
                 
                                                        Call for help, 
                  Stay calm.          Assess the             e.g.           Keep people          Follow up 
                                      situation.         emergency              safe.             actions. 
                                                          services.
                                                                                                              
                  •   Stay calm – staying calm is essential to manage an emergency effectively.  
                  •   Assess the situation – find out what has happened and how it happened.  
                      For example: asking a conscious casualty about their symptoms and the cause of their 
                      accident or asking bystanders for information. If assessment of a situation appears 
                      potentially dangerous or may offer risk to self (e.g. smoke coming from a cupboard), 
                      then the emergency services should be called, without further assessment.  
                  •   Call for help – use alarm buttons or another person to call the first aider or ask 
                      someone to call emergency services (999 or 112). 
                      The emergency services should be contacted in dangerous situations, e.g. fire; 
                      suspected bomb; or medical emergencies such as: unconscious casualty; epileptic 
                      seizure, asthma attack; suspected fractures, dislocations, head, neck or spine injuries 
                      or internal bleeding; severe external bleeding or burns etc.  
                                      Request fire brigade – to deal with fires, explosions, gas leaks, 
                                       chemical spillages, crush injuries or if individuals are trapped and 
                                       unable to escape.  
                                      Request ambulance – call to deal with medical emergencies, e.g. heart 
                                       attack, epilepsy, asthma attack, diabetic coma, unconscious 
                                       casualties, severe bleeding, suspected fractures, internal injuries or 
                                       head, neck or spine injuries.   
                                      Request police – to deal with criminal behaviour, e.g. theft, breaking 
                                       and entering, violent or aggressive behaviour or harm, anti-social 
                                       behaviour, bomb or security alerts. 
                        When contact with the requested service is made, they should be provided with the 
                        following information:  
                                      The type of incident – what happened, when it happened, the actions 
                                       taken, e.g. evacuation (where appropriate) or application of first aid 
                                       (where appropriate). 
                                      The number of people involved – the type of casualties (conscious, 
                                       unconscious), their age, severity of any injuries, including any first aid 
                                       actions being taken. 
                                      The location – full address and post code and where to go when they 
                                       reach the destination; including any information about specific access 
                                       points.  
                © VTCT. 2016                                                                                      
                                                                                                                               37 
                   
                                           Other emergency services needed, e.g. ambulance, police, and/or fire 
                                            brigade. 
                                           Who will meet the emergency service personnel at the location and 
                                            guide them to the site of the emergency.  
                           In the time between the emergency call and the emergency services arriving, all 
                           people should be kept safe – first aid, reassurance, evacuation etc.  
                            
                    •    Evacuate the area – For accidents and medical emergencies, other people should be 
                         asked to leave the areas to maintain privacy for the casualty. 
                         In the event of fires, chemical spillage or suspected bomb; a larger scale evaluation will 
                         be needed. Everyone should be evacuated by the appointed people, e.g. fire warden 
                         and health and safety officer and should go to the emergency meeting point for a 
                         register check and wait for the emergency services to arrive.   
                    •    Care for any casualties – Reassure all people involved. Administer first aid for minor 
                         injuries or while waiting for ambulance service for medical emergencies  
                    •    Post-emergency management – After any emergency, it is important to deal with any 
                         trauma (personal or other peoples) 
                    •    Record and report the emergency – using the accident or incident book. All 
                         accidents and emergencies must be recorded and reported in detail and in accordance 
                         with relevant legislation (RIDDOR). The information reported should include: 
                                           Name of the organisation and reporting person 
                                           The type of emergency  
                                           Where it took place, the time and date 
                                           How the emergency happened 
                                           The name of any casualties, with details of the injuries and any first aid 
                                            provided and subsequent actions, e.g. sent home or with emergency 
                                            services  
                                           Witness statements and signatures  
                                           Actions taken, e.g. contacting emergency services, evacuation of the 
                                            building in the event of fire or notifying emergency contacts  
                                           The name and signature of the person who dealt with the emergency 
                                           Follow up actions and notes  
                   
                  Further Information on reporting accidents and incidents is available from: 
                                                                   
                  http://www.hse.gov.uk/riddor/report.htm
                   
                  Additional training should be provided by organisation’s employing staff. Those who are self-
                  employed would need to identify and source additional training, such as: first aid and CPR; 
                  reporting accidents, risk assessment, manual handling and fire safety. 
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               38 
                   
                  To manage any emergency effectively, it is important to know the following:  
                    •    Where is the nearest telephone? 
                    •    Where is the location of the nearest first aid box?  
                    •    Who is responsible for stocking the first aid box and what should it contain?  
                    •    Where is the nearest safety exit?  
                    •    Where are fire extinguishers located?  
                    •    Which extinguisher is appropriate for specific types of fire? 
                    •    Where are the fire assembly points?  
                   
                  Maintaining the safety children, older people and disabled people in 
                  emergency situations  
                  In emergency situations, vulnerable groups such as children, disabled people and adult 
                  adults may require additional support and assistance; especially during an evacuation, such 
                  as a fire or other large scale emergency.  
                   
                  In these situations, it is important to know: 
                    •    How many people from specific groups are in the facility and where are they located? 
                    •    Where are the different evacuation routes from specific areas?  
                    •    What assistive equipment is available, if it is required?  
                    •    What additional support is available to assist evacuation, e.g. appointed staff?  
                   
                  Things to consider when managing evacuations of vulnerable groups:  
                    •    Deaf or partial hearing may need alternative signals to ‘raise the alarm’, e.g. the use of 
                         a visual alarm, such as a flashing light  
                    •    Children will need to be supervised and clearly instructed to evacuate an area, without 
                         causing them panic.  
                    •    Adults with learning disabilities, e.g. Downs syndrome will need to supervised and 
                         clearly instructed to an assembly point   
                    •    Blind or partial sighted people may need one-to-one support with evacuation, e.g. the 
                         offer of an arm to guide them out of a building  
                    •    Physical disability or mobility issues, e.g. wheelchair user or walking aid may need 
                         assistance evacuating a building. There may be equipment available to assist their 
                         evacuation and named staff may be appointed and responsible for assisting the 
                         person.  
                                          Lifts should not be used during fire emergencies 
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               39 
                   
                  Section 3: The role of a health and safety supervisor 
                  The health and safety supervisor will be required to take responsibility for all aspects of 
                  health, safety and welfare introduced in sections 1 and 2 of this manual.  
                   
                  The importance self-presentation and monitoring others in accordance with 
                  health and safety requirements 
                  An essential aspect of the supervisory role is to lead by example and provide a positive role 
                  model. This demands appropriate attention to own personal presentation and hygiene to 
                  meet with legal and salon requirements.  
                   
                  Consideration must be given to: 
                    •    Uniform  
                    •    Footwear 
                    •    Hair 
                    •    Jewellery  
                    •    Correct use of personal protective equipment, e.g. gloves and aprons.   
                   
                  Responding to hazards and risks to ensure working practices meet legal 
                  requirements 
                  The supervisor must ensure the environment and equipment meets health, safety and 
                  welfare requirements. 
                   
                  Consideration may include: 
                    •    Positioning of stylist or therapist and client in order to maintain safety and reduce risks 
                         and lessen fatigue   
                    •    Handling, use and storage of products, materials, tools and equipment safely to meet 
                         with manufacturers’ instructions   
                    •    Disposal of all types of salon waste safely to meet with legal and salon requirements 
                         and wherever possible follow eco-friendly options  
                    •    Following relevant health and safety regulations, e.g. electricity regulations, COSHH, 
                         RIDDOR, Manual handling, Fire precautions, First Aid   
                    •    Monitoring accidents, e.g. slips, trips and falls   
                   
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               40 
                   
                  Maintaining a safe salon, monitoring and supporting others in a supervisory 
                  role. 
                  Supervisors must ensure all staff are fully inducted and trained to health, safety and welfare.  
                   
                  They must ensure all staff: 
                    •    Adhere to salon policies  
                    •    Have clean, tidy and safe standards of working   
                    •    Remove spillages, report slippery surfaces, e.g. oils, spills and remove/report obstacles   
                    •    Have clear access to work stations/beds/trolleys and equipment   
                    •    Use clean/sterilised/disinfected tools, equipment and work surfaces  
                    •    Are able to carry out a risk assessment   
                    •    Follow salon rules, e.g. no smoking, eating, drinking or drugs in salon   
                   
                  Supervisors must also know the salon policy for security of staff, clients and visitors, which 
                  would include:  
                    •    Being up to date with the systems for security   
                    •    Knowing emergency evacuation procedures   
                    •    Knowing how to store and use confidential staff and client records 
                   
                   
                   
                   
                  References: 
                    •    Health and Safety Executive (2016) Five Steps to Risk Assessment. Accessed on: 16-
                         5-2016. Available from: http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/fivesteps.htm.  
                    •    Health and Safety Executive (2016) Health and Safety Regulation. A Short Guide. 
                         Accessed on: 16-5-2016. Available from: http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/hsc13.pdf. 
                         Accessed on: 4-4-201 
                   
                  Websites: 
                    •    HSE: http://www.hse.gov.uk 
                    •    DBS: https://www.gov.uk/dbs-check-requests-guidance-for-employers 
                    •    Scotland (Disclosure): http://www.disclosurescotland.co.uk/apply/employers   
                    •    Northern Ireland (Access NI Disclosure): http://www.dojni.gov.uk/accessni 
                                                       
                  © VTCT. 2016                                                                                                     
                                                           41 
          
         Health and Safety in the Salon  
          
          
          
         Answer the following questions in your own words: 
          
         LO1. Know the principles of health and safety  
         1.  What are the three main influences on health and safety? 
         2.  Why is health and safety important in a salon environment?  
         3.  Why is legislation important?  
         4.  Name four pieces of health and safety legislation required for salon services.  
         5.  What is Duty of Care? 
         6.  What is the role of a health and safety officer?  
         7.  Give an example of three health and safety records relevant in a salon environment? 
         8.  List some ways to achieve high standards of health and safety 
         9.  What is meant by welfare? 
         10. What are some of the key factors that can affect a person’s welfare in the workplace?  
          
         LO2. Know the health and safety requirements in the salon  
          
         1.  What are some of the possible hazards in a salon environment? 
         2.  What is risk assessment? 
         3.  How can risks be controlled? 
         4.  What action should be taken if a risk is identified as being high?  
         5.  Give an example of a first aid emergency that may occur in a salon environment.  
         6.  What is the role of the hair stylist, barber or beauty therapist during an emergency?  
         7.  Why is it important to stay calm in an emergency?  
         8.  How would you contact the emergency services?  
         9.  Describe some of the personal protective equipment that can be used in a salon.  
         10. Explain the importance of sterilisation and disinfecting in the salon.  
         LO3. Understand the role of the health and safety supervisor  
          
         1.  Explain the importance of presentation in relation to health and safety  
         2.  Explain how to respond to hazards and risks and ensure working practices meet legal 
           requirements 
         3.  Explain how to maintain a safe salon  
         4.  Explain how to monitor and support others in a supervisory role 
         5.  Explain salon policy for security of staff, clients and visitors 
          
         © VTCT. 2016                                        
