                
                
                
       THE BELGIAN CONSTITUTION 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    This publication contains the text of the Belgian Con-
    stitution as updated following the constitutional revi-
    sion of 22 April 2019 (Belgian Official Gazette of 2 May 
              2019) 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
             JULY 2020 
       BELGIAN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
               
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
           Legal Affairs and Parliamentary Documentation Department 
                of the Belgian House of Representatives 
                      D/2020/4686/01              
       2 
                                           CONTENTS 
             
            Title I   
                On federal Belgium, its components and its territory                     5 
             
            Title Ibis   
                On general political objectives of federal Belgium,   
                the Communities and the Regions                                          6 
             
            Title II   
                On Belgians and their rights                                             7 
             
            Title III   
                On powers                                                               13 
             
                Chapter I – On the federal Houses                                       17 
                   Section I – On the House of Representatives                          23 
                   Section II – On the Senate                                           26 
             
                Chapter II – On federal legislative power                               32 
             
                Chapter III – On the King and the Federal Government                    38 
                   Section I – On the King                                              38 
                   Section II – On the Federal Government                               40 
                   Section III – On responsibilities                                    43 
             
                Chapter IV – On Communities and Regions                                 45 
                   Section I – On bodies                                                45 
                       Sub-section I – On Community and Regional Parliaments            45 
                       Sub-section II – On Community and Regional Governments           48 
                   Section II – On responsibilities                                     51 
                       Sub-section I – On the responsibilities of the Communities       51 
                       Sub-section II – On the competences of the Regions               54 
                       Sub-section III – Special provisions                             54 
             
                                                 
                                                                                         3 
                Chapter V – On the Constitutional Court,   
                              and the prevention and resolution of conflicts            56 
                   Section I – On the prevention of conflicts of competence             56 
                   Section II – On the Constitutional Court                             57 
                   Section III – On the prevention and the settlement of   
                                 conflicts of interest                                  58 
                 
                Chapter VI – On judicial power                                          59 
             
                Chapter VII – On the Council of State and administrative courts         66 
                 
                Chapter VIII – On provincial and municipal institutions                 67 
             
            Title IV 
                On international relations                                              70 
             
            Title V 
                On finances                                                             72 
             
            Title VI 
                On the armed forces and the police service                              75 
             
            Title VII 
                General provisions                                                      76 
             
            Title VIII 
                On the revision of the Constitution                                     77 
             
            Title IX 
                The entry into force and transitional provisions                        81 
             
                                                 
            4 
                    THE CONSTITUTION 
        
        
                          TITLE I   
        
                 ON FEDERAL BELGIUM, ITS COMPONENTS   
                       AND ITS TERRITORY 
        
        
                          Article 1 
        
         Belgium is a federal State composed of Communities and Regions.   
        
                          Article 2   
        
         Belgium  comprises  three  Communities:  the  Flemish  Community,  the 
       French Community and the German-speaking Community.   
        
                          Article 3   
        
         Belgium comprises three Regions: the Flemish Region, the Walloon Re-
       gion and the Brussels Region.   
        
                          Article 4   
        
         Belgium comprises four linguistic regions: the Dutch-speaking region, the 
       French-speaking region, the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital and the Ger-
       man-speaking region.   
         Each municipality of the Kingdom forms part of one of these linguistic re-
       gions.   
         The boundaries of the four linguistic regions can only be changed or cor-
       rected by a law passed by a majority of the votes cast in each linguistic group 
       in each House, on condition that a majority of the members of each group is 
       present and provided that the total number of votes in favour that are cast in 
       the two linguistic groups is equal to at least two thirds of the votes cast.   
        
                            
                                                 5 
                        Article 5   
        
        The Flemish Region comprises the following provinces: Antwerp, Flemish 
       Brabant, West Flanders, East Flanders and Limburg. The Walloon Region 
       comprises the following provinces: Walloon Brabant, Hainaut, Liege, Luxem-
       bourg and Namur.   
        A law can exclude certain territories, of which it establishes the bounda-
       ries, from division into provinces, bring them directly under the federal exec-
       utive power and subject them to a specific statute. This law must be passed 
       by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
                         Article 6 
        
        Provincial subdivisions can only be established by the law.   
                            
                        Article 7   
        
        The boundaries of the State, the provinces and the municipalities can 
       only be changed or corrected by virtue of a law.   
        
        
                       TITLE IBIS 
        
           ON GENERAL POLITICAL OBJECTIVES OF FEDERAL BELGIUM, 
                 THE COMMUNITIES AND THE REGIONS 
        
        
                        Article 7bis 
        
        In the exercise of their respective competences, the Federal State, the 
       Communities and the Regions pursue the objectives of sustainable develop-
       ment in its social, economic and environmental aspects, taking into account 
       the solidarity between the generations.   
        
        
                          
       6 
                        TITLE II 
        
                  ON BELGIANS AND THEIR RIGHTS 
        
        
                        Article 8   
        
        The status as a Belgian citizen is acquired, kept and lost according to rules 
       established by civil law.   
        The Constitution and the other laws concerning political rights, establish, 
       apart from this status, the necessary conditions for the exercising of these 
       rights.   
        In a departure from the second paragraph, the law can, in accordance 
       with Belgium’s international and supranational obligations, establish a right 
       to vote for citizens of the European Union who are not Belgian citizens.   
        The right to vote referred to in the preceding paragraph can be extended 
       by a law to Belgian residents who are not citizens of a Member State of the 
       European Union, under the conditions and in accordance with the terms 
       specified in such a law.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The law referred to in the fourth paragraph cannot be passed before 1 
       January 2001.   
        
                        Article 9 
        
        Naturalisation is granted by the federal legislative power.   
        
                        Article 10 
        
        No class distinctions exist in the State.   
        Belgians are equal before the law; they alone are eligible for civil and mil-
       itary service, but for the exceptions that can be created by a law for particular 
       cases.   
        Equality between women and men is guaranteed.   
        
                          
                                              7 
                        Article 11 
        
        Enjoyment of the rights and freedoms recognised for Belgians must be 
       provided without discrimination. To this end, laws and federate laws guaran-
       tee among others the rights and freedoms of ideological and philosophical 
       minorities.   
                            
                       Article 11bis 
        
        The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 guarantees that 
       women and men may equally exercise their rights and freedoms, and in par-
       ticular promotes their equal access to elective and public mandates.   
        The Council of Ministers and the Governments of the Communities and 
       the Regions include both women and men.   
        The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 provides for women 
       and men to sit on the permanent deputations of the provincial councils, the 
       colleges of the burgomasters and aldermen, the councils and permanent 
       committees of the public centres for social welfare and on the executives of 
       any other inter-provincial, supra-municipal, inter-municipal or intra-munici-
       pal territorial body.   
        The preceding paragraph does not apply when the law, federate law or 
       rule referred to in Article 134 provides for the direct election of the members 
       of the permanent deputations of the provincial councils, of aldermen, of the 
       members of the councils and permanent committees of the social welfare 
       centres or of the members of the executives of any other inter-provincial, su-
       pra-municipal, inter-municipal or intra-municipal territorial body.   
        
                        Article 12   
        
        The freedom of the individual is guaranteed.   
        No one can be prosecuted except in the cases provided for by the law, and 
       in the form prescribed by the law.   
        Except in the case of a flagrant offence, no one can be arrested except on 
       the strength of a reasoned judge’s order, which must be served at the latest 
       within forty-eight hours from the deprivation of liberty and which may only 
       result in provisional detention. 
        
                          
       8 
                        Article 13   
        
        No one can be separated, against his will, from the judge that the law has 
       assigned to him.   
        
                        Article 14 
        
        No punishment can be introduced or administered except by virtue of the 
       law.   
        
                       Article 14bis 
        
        Capital punishment is abolished.   
        
                        Article 15   
        
        One’s home is inviolable; no house search may take place except in the 
       cases provided for by the law and in the form prescribed by the law.   
                            
                        Article 16   
        
        No one can be deprived of his property except in the case of expropriation 
       for a public purpose, in the cases and manner established by the law and in 
       return for fair compensation paid beforehand.   
        
                        Article 17 
        
        Assets may not be confiscated as a means of punishment.   
        
                        Article 18 
        
        Civil death is abolished; it cannot be re-introduced.   
        
                        Article 19 
        
        Freedom of worship, its public practice and freedom to demonstrate 
       one’s opinions on all matters are guaranteed, but offences committed when 
       this freedom is used may be punished.   
                                              9 
                        Article 20   
        
        No one can be obliged to contribute in any way whatsoever to the acts 
       and ceremonies of a religion or to observe its days of rest.   
        
                        Article 21   
        
        The State does not have the right to intervene either in the appointment 
       or in the installation of ministers of any religion whatsoever or to forbid these 
       ministers from corresponding with their superiors, from publishing the acts 
       of these superiors, but, in this latter case, normal responsibilities as regards 
       the press and publishing apply.   
        A civil wedding should always precede the blessing of the marriage, apart 
       from the exceptions to be established by the law if needed.   
        
                        Article 22   
        
        Everyone has the right to the respect of his private and family life, except 
       in the cases and conditions determined by the law.   
        The laws, federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134 guarantee the 
       protection of this right.   
        
                       Article 22bis   
        
        Each child is entitled to have his or her moral, physical, mental and sexual 
       integrity respected.   
        Each child has the right to express his or her views in all matters affecting 
       him or her, the views of the child being given due weight in accordance with 
       his or her age and maturity.   
        Each child has the right to benefit from measures and facilities which pro-
       mote his or her development.   
        In all decisions concerning children, the interest of the child is a primary 
       consideration.   
        The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 ensures these rights 
       of the child.   
        
                          
       10 
                        Article 23 
        
        Everyone has the right to lead a life in keeping with human dignity.   
        To this end, the laws, federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134 
       guarantee economic, social and cultural rights, taking into account corre-
       sponding obligations, and determine the conditions for exercising them.   
        These rights include among others:   
        1°  the right to employment and to the free choice of an occupation 
          within the context of a general employment policy, aimed among oth-
          ers at ensuring a level of employment that is as stable and high as 
          possible, the right to fair terms of employment and to fair remunera-
          tion, as well as the right to information, consultation and collective 
          negotiation;   
        2°  the right to social security, to health care and to social, medical and 
          legal aid;   
        3°  the right to decent accommodation;   
        4°  the right to the protection of a healthy environment;   
        5°  the right to cultural and social fulfilment;   
        6°  the right to family allowances.   
        
                        Article 24   
        
        § 1. Education is free; any preventive measure is forbidden; the punish-
       ment of offences is regulated only by the law or federate law.   
        The community offers free choice to parents.   
        The community organises non-denominational education. This implies in 
       particular the respect of the philosophical, ideological or religious beliefs of 
       parents and pupils.   
        Schools run by the public authorities offer, until the end of compulsory 
       education, the choice between the teaching of one of the recognised reli-
       gions and non-denominational ethics teaching.   
        
        § 2. If a community, in its capacity as an organising authority, wishes to 
       delegate powers to one or several autonomous bodies, it can only do so by 
       federate law adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast.   
        
        § 3. Everyone has the right to education with the respect of fundamental 
       rights and freedoms. Access to education is free until the end of compulsory 
                                             11 
       education.   
        All pupils of school age have the right to moral or religious education at 
       the community’s expense.   
        
        § 4. All pupils or students, parents, teaching staff or institutions are equal 
       before the law or federate law. The law and federate law take into account 
       objective differences, in particular the characteristics of each organising au-
       thority that warrant appropriate treatment.   
        
        § 5. The organisation, the recognition and the subsidising of education by 
       the community are regulated by the law or federate law.   
        
                        Article 25 
        
        The press is free; censorship can never be introduced; no security can be 
       demanded from authors, publishers or printers.   
        When the author is known and resident in Belgium, neither the publisher, 
       the printer nor the distributor can be prosecuted.   
        
                        Article 26   
        
        Belgians have the right to gather peaceably and without arms, in accord-
       ance with the laws that can regulate the exercise of this right, without sub-
       mitting it to prior authorisation.   
        This provision does not apply to open air meetings, which are entirely 
       subject to police regulations.   
        
                        Article 27   
        
        Belgians have the right to enter into association or partnership; this right 
       cannot be subject to any preventive measure.   
        
                        Article 28   
        
        Everyone has the right to address petitions signed by one or more persons 
       to the public authorities.   
        Constituted bodies are alone entitled to address petitions under a collec-
       tive name.   
       12 
                        Article 29   
        
        The confidentiality of letters is inviolable.   
        The law determines which officials may violate the confidentiality of let-
       ters entrusted to the postal service.   
        
                        Article 30   
        
        The use of languages spoken in Belgium is optional; only the law can rule 
       on this matter, and only for acts of the public authorities and for judicial af-
       fairs.   
        
                        Article 31 
        
        No authorisation is necessary prior to taking legal action against civil 
       servants for offences resulting from their administration, except with regard 
       to what has been ruled on concerning ministers and members of the Com-
       munity and Regional Governments.   
        
                        Article 32   
        
        Everyone has the right to consult any administrative document and to ob-
       tain a copy, except in the cases and conditions stipulated by the laws, feder-
       ate laws or rules referred to in Article 134.   
        
        
                        TITLE III   
        
                       ON POWERS 
        
        
                        Article 33   
        
        All powers emanate from the Nation.   
        These powers are exercised in the manner laid down by the Constitution.   
        
                          
                                             13 
                        Article 34   
        
        The exercising of specific powers can be assigned by a treaty or by a law 
       to institutions of public international law.   
        
                        Article 35   
        
        The federal authority only has competences in the matters that are for-
       mally assigned to it by the Constitution and the laws passed by virtue of the 
       Constitution itself.   
        The Communities and the Regions, each in its own field of concern, have 
       competences for the other matters, under the conditions and in the terms 
       stipulated by the law. This law must be adopted by a majority as described in 
       Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The law referred to in the second paragraph determines the date on 
       which this article comes into force. This date cannot precede the date of the 
       entry into force of the new article to be inserted in Title III of the Constitution, 
       which determines the competences exclusive to the federal authority.   
        
                        Article 36 
        
        The federal legislative power is exercised jointly by the King, the House of 
       Representatives and the Senate.   
        
                        Article 37   
        
        The federal executive power, as regulated by the Constitution, belongs to 
       the King.   
        
                        Article 38   
        
        Each Community has those powers which are recognised by the Consti-
       tution or by the laws passed by virtue of the Constitution.   
        
                          
       14 
                        Article 39   
        
        The law assigns to the regional bodies that it creates and that are com-
       posed of elected representatives the power to manage the matters that it de-
       termines, with the exception of those referred to in Articles 30 and 127 to 129, 
       within the scope and according to the manner laid down by a law. This law 
       must be passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
                       Article 39bis   
        
        Except for matters relating to finances or budget or matters that are reg-
       ulated by a majority of two thirds of the votes cast, matters attributed exclu-
       sively to regional bodies can be the subject of a referendum in the Region 
       concerned.   
        The rule referred to in Article 134 determines the procedures and arrange-
       ments for the referendum, and is adopted by a majority of two thirds of the 
       votes cast, under the condition that the majority of the members of the Par-
       liament concerned is present. A law passed by a majority as described in Ar-
       ticle 4, last paragraph lays down additional majority requirements with re-
       spect to the Brussels-Capital Region.   
        
                       Article 39ter   
        
        The law, federate law or rule referred to in Article 134 that regulates the 
       elections for the House of Representatives or a Community or Regional Par-
       liament, and that is promulgated less than one year before the date on which 
       the legislative term is to come to an end, comes into force no sooner than 
       one year after it has been promulgated.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when the first elections for the 
       European Parliament take place after it has been published in the Belgian 
       Official Gazette.   
        
                        Article 40   
        
        Judiciary power is exercised by the courts.   
                                             15 
        Court decisions are executed in the name of the King.   
        
                        Article 41   
        
        Interests which are exclusively of a municipal or provincial nature are 
       ruled on by municipal or provincial councils, according to the principles laid 
       down by the Constitution. However, the rule referred to in Article 134 can 
       abolish the provincial institutions in implementation of a law passed by a 
       majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph. In such a case, the rule re-
       ferred to in Article 134 can replace them by supra-municipal collectivities, the 
       councils of which rule the exclusively supra-municipal interests in accord-
       ance with the principles established by the Constitution. The rule referred to 
       in Article 134 must be adopted by a majority of two thirds of the votes cast, 
       under the condition that the majority of the members of the Parliament con-
       cerned is present.   
        The rule referred to in Article 134 defines the competences, working rules 
       and mode of election of intra-municipal territorial bodies that are authorised 
       to regulate matters of municipal interest.   
        These intra-municipal territorial bodies are created in municipalities with 
       more than 100,000 inhabitants following the initiative of the municipal coun-
       cil. Their members are directly elected. In implementation of a law adopted 
       by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, the federate law or rule 
       referred to in Article 134 regulates the other conditions and the way in which 
       such intra-municipal territorial bodies may be created.   
        This  federate  law  and  the  rule  referred  to  in  Article  134  can  only  be 
       adopted by a majority of two thirds of the votes cast, under the condition that 
       the majority of the members of the Parliament concerned is present.   
        Matters of municipal, supra-municipal or provincial interest can be the 
       subject of a referendum in the municipality, supra-municipal collectivity or 
       province concerned. The rule referred to in Article 134 regulates the proce-
       dures and arrangements for the referendum.   
        
        
                          
       16 
                       CHAPTER I 
        
                    ON THE FEDERAL HOUSES 
        
        
                        Article 42 
        
        The members of the two Houses represent the Nation, and not only those 
       who elected them.   
        
                        Article 43   
        
        § 1. For cases determined by the Constitution, the elected members of the 
       House of Representatives are divided into a Dutch linguistic group and a 
       French linguistic group, in the manner determined by the law.   
        
        § 2. For cases determined by the Constitution, senators, except the sena-
       tor appointed by the Parliament of the German-speaking Community, are di-
       vided into a Dutch linguistic group and a French linguistic group.   
        The senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° and 6° make up the Dutch 
       linguistic group of the Senate. The senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 2° to 
       4° and 7° make up the French linguistic group of the Senate.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014.   
        The following provisions apply until that day:   
        
        “§ 1. For cases determined by the Constitution, the elected members of 
       each House are divided into a Dutch linguistic group and a French linguistic 
       group, in the manner determined by the law.   
        
        § 2. The senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1°, 3° and 6° make up the 
       Dutch linguistic group of the Senate. The senators referred to in Article 67, § 
       1, 2°, 4° and 7° make up the French linguistic group of the Senate.”.   
        
                                             17 
                        Article 44   
        
        The Houses meet by right each year on the second Tuesday of October, 
       unless they have been convened prior to this by the King.   
        The Houses must meet for at least forty days each year. The Senate is a 
       non-permanent body.   
        The King pronounces the closing of the session.   
        The King has the right to convene the Houses to an extraordinary meet-
       ing.   
         
        Transitional provision   
        
        The second sentence of the second paragraph comes into force on the 
       day when elections take place with a view to the complete renewal of the 
       Community and Regional Parliaments in 2014.   
        
                        Article 45   
        
        The King can adjourn the Houses. However, the adjournment cannot be 
       for longer than one month, nor can it be repeated in the same session with-
       out the consent of the Houses.   
        
                        Article 46   
        
        The King has the right to dissolve the House of Representatives only if the 
       latter, with the absolute majority of its members:   
        1°  either rejects a motion of confidence in the Federal Government and 
          does not propose to the King, within three days of the day of the re-
          jection of the motion, the appointment of a successor to the prime 
          minister;   
        2°  or adopts a motion of no confidence with regard to the Federal Gov-
          ernment and does not simultaneously propose to the King the ap-
          pointment of a successor to the prime minister.   
        The motions of confidence and no confidence can only be voted on forty-
       eight hours after the tabling of the motion.   
        Moreover, the King may, in the event of the resignation of the Federal Gov-
       ernment, dissolve the House of Representatives after having received its 
       agreement expressed by the absolute majority of its members.   
       18 
        The act of dissolution convenes the electorate within forty days and the 
       House of Representatives within two months.   
        In case both Houses are dissolved in accordance with Article 195, the 
       Houses are convened within three months.   
        In case of early dissolution, the new federal parliamentary term may not 
       extend beyond the day when the first election of the European Parliament 
       following this dissolution is held.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        After the 2014 election of the European Parliament, a law, passed by a 
       majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, fixes the date when the 
       sixth paragraph comes into force. This date is that on which Article 65, third 
       paragraph and Article 118, § 2, fourth sub-paragraph come into force.   
        The fourth and fifth paragraphs come into force on the day when elec-
       tions take place with a view to the complete renewal of the Community and 
       Regional Parliaments in 2014. Until this date, the following provisions are ap-
       plicable in lieu of the fourth and fifth paragraphs: 
        
        “The dissolution of the House of Representatives entails the dissolution 
       of the Senate.   
        The act of dissolution convenes the electorate within forty days and the 
       Houses within two months.   
        The dissolution of the House of Representatives leading to parliamentary 
       elections at federal level that take place the same day as the 2014 election of 
       the Community and Regional Parliaments entails the dissolution of the Sen-
       ate. The electorate for the House of Representatives is convened within forty 
       days. The Houses are convened within three months.”. 
        
                        Article 47   
        
        The sittings of the Houses are public.   
        Nevertheless, each House can meet in camera at the request of its presi-
       dent or of ten members.   
        It decides afterwards, by absolute majority, whether the sitting must be 
       continued in public on the same subject.   
        
                          
                                             19 
                        Article 48   
        
        Each House verifies the credentials of its members and judges any dispute 
       that can be raised on this matter.   
        
                        Article 49   
        
        One cannot be a member of both Houses at the same time.   
        
                        Article 50 
        
        Any member of either House appointed by the King as minister and who 
       accepts this appointment ceases to sit in Parliament and takes up his man-
       date again when the King has terminated his office as minister. The law de-
       termines the rules for his replacement in the House concerned.   
        
                        Article 51   
        
        Any member of either House appointed by the Federal Government to any 
       salaried position other than that of minister and who accepts the appoint-
       ment immediately ceases to sit in Parliament and only takes his seat again 
       after having been re-elected.   
        
                        Article 52 
        
        Each session, each House appoints its president, its vice-presidents, and 
       forms its bureau.   
        
                        Article 53   
        
        All resolutions are passed by an absolute majority of the votes cast, ex-
       cept for what is established by the rules of procedure of the Houses with re-
       gard to elections and nominations.   
        If the vote is tied, the proposal submitted for discussion is rejected.   
        Neither of the two Houses can pass a resolution unless a majority of its 
       members is present.   
        
                          
       20 
                        Article 54   
        
        Except for budgets and laws requiring a special majority, a reasoned mo-
       tion signed by at least three-quarters of the members of one of the linguistic 
       groups and tabled following the depositing of the report and prior to the final 
       vote in a public sitting can declare that the provisions that it designates of a 
       Government bill or private member’s bill can gravely damage relations be-
       tween the Communities.   
        In this case, Parliamentary procedure is suspended and the motion is re-
       ferred to the Council of Ministers, which within thirty days gives its reasoned 
       opinion on the motion and invites the House involved to pronounce on this 
       opinion or on the Government bill or private member’s bill that, if need be, 
       has been amended.   
        This procedure can be applied only once by the members of a linguistic 
       group with regard to the same Government bill or private member’s bill.   
        
                        Article 55   
        
        Votes are cast by sitting and standing or by call-over; on the laws as a 
       whole is always voted by call-over. The election and nomination of candi-
       dates are carried out by secret ballot.   
        
                        Article 56   
        
        The House of Representatives has the right to hold an enquiry.   
        At the request of fifteen of its members, the House of Representatives, a 
       Community or Regional Parliament or the King, the Senate can decide by ab-
       solute majority of the votes cast, with at least a third of the votes cast in each 
       linguistic group, that an information report will be drafted concerning an is-
       sue that also has repercussions on the competences of the Communities or 
       Regions. The report is approved by absolute majority of the votes cast, with 
       at least a third of the votes cast in each linguistic group.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provision applies: 
                                             21 
        “Each House has the right to hold an enquiry.”. 
        
                        Article 57   
        
        It is forbidden to present petitions to the Houses in person.   
        The House of Representatives has the right to send to ministers petitions 
       that are addressed to it. The ministers are obliged to give explanations on the 
       content of these petitions whenever the House so requires.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The second paragraph comes into force on the day when elections take 
       place with a view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional 
       Parliaments in 2014. Until this day, the following provision applies in lieu of 
       the second paragraph: 
        
        “Each House has the right to send to ministers petitions that are ad-
       dressed to it. The ministers are obliged to explain the content of these peti-
       tions whenever the House so requires.”. 
        
                        Article 58   
        
        No member of either House can be prosecuted or be the subject of any 
       investigation with regard to opinions expressed and votes cast by him in the 
       exercise of his duties.   
        
                        Article 59   
        
        Except in the case of a flagrant offence, no member of either House may, 
       during a session and in criminal matters, be directly referred or summoned 
       before a court or be arrested, except with the authorisation of the House of 
       which he is a member.   
        Except in the case of a flagrant offence, coercive measures requiring the 
       intervention of a judge cannot, during a session and in criminal matters, be 
       instituted against a member of either House, except by the first President of 
       the appeal court at the request of the competent judge. This decision is to be 
       communicated to the President of the House concerned.   
        All searches or seizures executed by virtue of the preceding paragraph 
       22 
       can be performed only in the presence of the President of the House con-
       cerned or a member appointed by him.   
        During the session, only the officers of the public prosecutor’s office and 
       competent officers may institute criminal proceedings against a member of 
       either House.   
        The member concerned of either House may at any stage of the judicial 
       enquiry request during a session and in criminal matters that the House of 
       which he is a member suspend proceedings. To grant this request, the House 
       concerned must decide by a majority of two thirds of the votes cast.   
        Detention of a member of either House or his prosecution before a court 
       is suspended during the session if the House of which he is a member so re-
       quests.   
        
                        Article 60   
        
        Each House determines, in its rules of procedure, the way in which it ex-
       ercises its duties.   
        
        
                        SECTION I 
        
                  ON THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
        
        
                        Article 61 
        
        The members of the House of Representatives are elected directly by cit-
       izens who are at least eighteen years of age and who do not fall within the 
       categories of exclusion stipulated by the law.   
        Each elector has the right to only one vote.   
        
                        Article 62   
        
        The composition of the electoral colleges is regulated by the law.   
        Elections take place in accordance with the system of proportional repre-
       sentation that the law determines.   
        Voting is obligatory and secret. It takes place in the municipality, except 
       in the cases determined by the law.   
                                             23 
                        Article 63 
        
        § 1. The House of Representatives is composed of one hundred and fifty 
       members.   
        
        § 2. The number of seats in each electoral district corresponds to the re-
       sult of dividing the number of inhabitants of the electoral district by the fed-
       eral divisor, which is obtained by dividing the number of the population of 
       the Kingdom by one hundred and fifty.   
        The remaining seats are assigned to the electoral districts with the great-
       est surplus of population not yet represented.   
        
        § 3. The distribution of the members of the House of Representatives 
       among the electoral districts is determined by the King in proportion to the 
       population.   
        The number of inhabitants in each electoral district is established every 
       ten years by a census or by any other means defined by the law. The King 
       publishes the results within six months.   
        Within three months of this publication, the King determines the number 
       of seats to be assigned to each electoral district.   
        The new distribution is applied as of the following general election.   
        
        § 4. The law determines the electoral districts; it also determines the con-
       ditions required to be an elector as well as the way in which elections are 
       conducted.   
        However, the law determines special rules with a view to protecting the 
       legitimate interests of French and Dutch-speaking people in the former prov-
       ince of Brabant.   
        The provisions which establish these special rules may only be amended 
       by a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
                        Article 64   
        
        To be eligible, one must:   
        1°  be Belgian;   
        2°  enjoy civil and political rights;   
        3°  have reached the age of eighteen;   
        4°  be resident in Belgium.   
       24 
        No other condition of eligibility can be required.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The first paragraph, 3° comes into force on the day when elections take 
       place with a view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional 
       Parliaments in 2014. Until this day, and without prejudice to Article 64, 1°, 2° 
       and 4°, one must have reached the age of twenty-one.   
        
                        Article 65 
        
        The members of the House of Representatives are elected for five years.   
        The House is re-elected as a whole every five years.   
        Elections for the House take place on the same day as elections for the 
       European Parliament.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        After elections for the European Parliament have been held in 2014, a law 
       passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph sets the date on 
       which the third paragraph comes into force. This date is that on which Article 
       46, sixth paragraph and Article 118, § 2, fourth sub-paragraph come into 
       force.   
        Parliamentary elections at federal level will in any case take place on the 
       same day as the first elections for the European Parliament following the 
       publication of this revision in the Belgian Official Gazette.   
        
                        Article 66   
                            
        Each member of the House of Representatives has an annual indemnity 
       of twelve thousand francs.   
        Within the national borders, the members of the House of Representa-
       tives have the right to free travel on all means of transport operated or con-
       ceded by the public authorities.   
        The President of the House of Representatives can be granted an annual 
       indemnity to be charged to the allowance that covers the expenses of this 
       assembly.   
                                             25 
        The House determines the amount that can be deducted from the indem-
       nity to form a contribution to retirement and pension funds that it considers 
       necessary to set up.   
        
        
                       SECTION II 
        
                       ON THE SENATE 
        
        
                        Article 67 
        
        § 1. The Senate is composed of sixty senators, of whom: 
        1°  twenty-nine  senators  appointed  by  the  Flemish  Parliament  from 
          among its members or from among the members of the Dutch linguis-
          tic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region; 
        2°  ten senators appointed from among its members by the Parliament 
          of the French Community; 
        3°  eight senators appointed from among its members by the Parliament 
          of the Walloon Region; 
        4°  two senators appointed from among its members by the French lin-
          guistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region; 
        5°  one senator appointed from among its members by the Parliament of 
          the German-speaking Community; 
        6°  six senators appointed by the senators referred to in 1°; 
        7°  four senators appointed by the senators referred to in 2° to 4°.   
        
        § 2. At least one of the senators referred to in § 1, 1° is to be legally resident 
       in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of his election.   
        Three of the senators referred to in § 1, 2° are member of the French lin-
       guistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region. As a departure 
       from § 1, 2°, one of these three senators must not be a member of the Parlia-
       ment of the French Community.   
        
        § 3. The Senate is composed of no more than two-thirds of senators of the 
       same gender.   
        
        § 4. When a list mentioned in Article 68, § 2 is not represented by senators 
       26 
       respectively referred to in § 1, 1° or in § 1, 2°, 3° or 4°, the senators referred to 
       in § 1, 6° or in § 1, 7° may be appointed by the Members of the House of Rep-
       resentatives who have been elected on the aforesaid list.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “§ 1. Without prejudice to Article 72, the Senate is composed of seventy-
       one senators, of whom: 
        1°  twenty-five  senators  elected  in  accordance  with  Article  61  by  the 
          Dutch electoral college; 
        2°  fifteen senators elected in accordance with Article 61 by the French 
          electoral college; 
        3°  ten senators appointed from among its members by the Parliament 
          of the Flemish Community, called the Flemish Parliament; 
        4°  ten senators appointed from among its members by the Parliament 
          of the French Community; 
        5°  one senator appointed from among its members by the Parliament of 
          the German-speaking Community; 
        6°  six senators appointed by the senators referred to in 1° and 3°; 
        7°  four senators appointed by the senators referred to in 2° and 4°. 
        When their Parliament is re-elected as a whole and this re-election does 
       not coincide with the renewal of the Senate, the senators referred to in the 
       first paragraph, 3° to 5° who no longer have a seat in their Parliament retain 
       the mandate of senator until the opening of the first session following the re-
       election of their Parliament.   
        
        § 2. At least one of the senators referred to in § 1,1°,3° and 6° is to be legally 
       resident in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of his election.   
        At least six of the senators referred to in § 1, 2°, 4° and 7° are to be legally 
       resident in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of their elec-
       tion. If at least four of the senators referred to in § 1, 2° are not legally resident 
       in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of their election, at least 
       two of the senators referred to in § 1, 4° must be legally resident in the bilin-
       gual region of Brussels-Capital on the day of their election.”. 
                                             27 
                        Article 68 
        
        § 1. The Senate seats referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° are distributed among 
       the lists according to the system of proportional representation determined 
       by the law, in the way laid down by the law, on the basis of the addition of the 
       vote counts of the lists obtained in the different electoral districts at the elec-
       tion for the Flemish Parliament.   
        The lists of which the vote counts are added up in pursuance of the first 
       subparagraph only qualify for being allocated Senate seats referred to in Ar-
       ticle 67, § 1, 1° provided that they have obtained at least one seat in the Flem-
       ish Parliament.   
        The Senate seats referred to in Article 67, § 1, 2° to 4° are distributed 
       among the lists according to the system of proportional representation de-
       termined by the law, in the way laid down by the law, on the basis of the ad-
       dition of the vote counts of the lists obtained in the different electoral dis-
       tricts at the election for the Parliament of the Walloon Region and the vote 
       counts of the lists for the French linguistic group obtained at the election for 
       the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region.   
        The lists of which the vote counts are added up in pursuance of the third 
       subparagraph only qualify for being allocated Senate seats referred to in Ar-
       ticle 67, § 1, 2° to 4° provided that they have obtained at least one seat re-
       spectively in the Parliament of the French Community, in the Walloon Parlia-
       ment and in the French linguistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-
       Capital Region.   
        The law determines the rules for the appointment of the senators referred 
       to in Article 67, § 1, 1° to 4°, with the exception of the detailed rules which, in 
       pursuance of a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last para-
       graph, are laid down by the Community Parliaments, each for itself, by fed-
       erate law. This federate law must be passed by a two-thirds majority of the 
       votes cast, on condition that the majority of the members of the Parliament 
       concerned is present.   
        The senator referred to in Article 67, § 1, 5° is appointed by the Parliament 
       of the German-speaking Community by absolute majority of the votes cast.   
        
        § 2. The Senate seats referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° to 7° are distributed 
       among the lists according to the system of proportional representation de-
       termined by the law, in the way laid down by the law, on the basis of the ad-
       dition of the vote counts of the lists obtained at the election for the House of 
       28 
       Representatives. The aforesaid system of proportional representation is the 
       system which is described in Article 63, § 2 of the Constitution. A law passed 
       by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph determines the elec-
       toral districts of which the votes are taken into consideration for distributing 
       the seats of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° and 7° who belong 
       respectively to the Dutch and the French linguistic group.   
        A list may only be taken into consideration for distributing the seats of a 
       single linguistic group.   
        The law determines the rules for the appointment of the senators referred 
       to in Article 67, § 1, 6° to 7°.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014, with the exception of § 2, first sub-paragraph, last sentence. Until this 
       day, the following provisions apply: 
         
        “§ 1. The total number of senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1°, 2°, 3°, 
       4°, 6° and 7° is divided, according to the system of proportional representa-
       tion that the law determines, among each linguistic group on the basis of the 
       vote count of the lists obtained at the election of the senators referred to in 
       Article 67, § 1, 1° and 2°.   
        For the appointment of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 3° and 
       4°, only those lists are taken into consideration on which at least one senator 
       referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° and 2° is elected and provided that a sufficient 
       number of members elected on this list sit, according to the case, in the Par-
       liament of the Flemish Community or the Parliament of the French Commu-
       nity.   
        For the appointment of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° and 
       7°, only those lists are taken into consideration on which at least on senator 
       referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° and 2° is elected.   
        
        § 2. For the election of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° and 2°, 
       voting is obligatory and secret. Voting takes place in the municipality, except 
       in the cases that the law determines.   
        
        § 3. For the election of senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° and 2°, the 
                                             29 
       law determines the electoral districts and the composition of the electoral 
       colleges; it also determines the conditions which must be met in order to be 
       an elector, as well as the way in which elections are conducted.   
        The law determines the rules for the appointment of the senators referred 
       to in Article 67, § 1, 3° to 5°, with the exception of the detailed rules which, in 
       pursuance of a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last para-
       graph, are laid down by the Community Parliaments, each for itself, by fed-
       erate law. This federate law must be adopted by a two-thirds majority of the 
       votes cast, on condition that the majority of the members of the Parliament 
       concerned is present.   
        The senator referred to in Article 67, § 1, 5° is appointed by the Parliament 
       of the German-speaking Community by absolute majority of the votes cast.   
        The law determines the rules for the appointment of the senators referred 
       to in Article 67, § 1, 6° and 7°.”. 
        
                        Article 69   
        
        In order to be appointed as a senator, one must: 
        1°  be Belgian;   
        2°  enjoy civil and political rights;   
        3°  have reached the age of eighteen;   
        4°  be resident in Belgium.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “In order to be elected or appointed as a senator, one must: 
        1°  be Belgian; 
        2°  enjoy civil and political rights; 
        3°  have reached the age of twenty-one; 
        4°  be resident in Belgium.”. 
        
                        Article 70   
        
        The mandate of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° to 5° runs from 
       30 
       the day when they take the oath in the Senate and ends, after the complete 
       renewal of the Parliament that has appointed them, on the day when the first 
       session of the latter is opened.   
        The mandate of the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° and 7° runs 
       from the day when they take the oath in the Senate and ends on the day when 
       the first session of the House of Representatives following its complete re-
       newal is opened.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “The senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° and 2° are elected for four 
       years. The senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° and 7° are appointed for 
       four years.   
        The Senate is in any case renewed as a whole when the elections for the 
       Community and Regional Parliaments are held in 2014.”.   
        
                        Article 71 
        
        Senators do not receive a salary.   
        They do, however, have the right to be compensated for expenses.   
        The compensation granted to the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1° 
       to 4° is fixed by the Community or Regional Parliament that appoints them. 
       It is charged to this Parliament.   
        The compensation granted to the senator referred to in Article 67, § 1, 5° 
       is the same as the compensation granted to the senators referred to in Article 
       67, § 1, 3° and is charged to the Parliament of the German-speaking Commu-
       nity.   
        The compensation granted to the senators referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° 
       and 7° is charged to the Senate’s allowance.   
        Within the national borders, the members of the Senate have the right to 
       free travel on all means of transport operated or conceded by the public au-
       thorities. 
        
                          
                                             31 
        Transitional provision   
        
        The insertion of the third to fifth paragraphs of this article becomes effec-
       tive on the day when elections take place with a view to the complete re-
       newal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 2014.   
        Until this day, senators are entitled to a compensation of four thousand 
       francs a year. 
        
                        Article 72 
        
        [Repealed] 
        
                        Article 73 
        
        Any assembly of the Senate that is held when the House of Representa-
       tives is not in session is null and void. 
                            
                            
                       CHAPTER II   
        
                  ON FEDERAL LEGISLATIVE POWER   
        
        
                        Article 74   
        
        As a departure from Article 36, federal legislative power is jointly exer-
       cised by the King and the House of Representatives for other matters than 
       those described in Articles 77 and 78.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
         
        “As a departure from Article 36, federal legislative power is jointly exer-
       cised by the King and by the House of Representatives for: 
        1°  the granting of naturalisation; 
       32 
        2°  laws relating to the civil and criminal liability of the King’s ministers; 
        3°  State budgets and accounts, without prejudice to Article 174, first 
          paragraph, second sentence; 
        4°  the setting of army quotas.”. 
        
                        Article 75 
        
        Each branch of the federal legislative power has the right to propose leg-
       islation. However, the Senate can only exercise this right with respect to the 
       matters described in Article 77.   
        With respect to the matters described in Article 78, draft bills submitted 
       to the Houses on the King’s initiative are tabled with the House of Represent-
       atives and then sent to the Senate.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments. 
       Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “Each branch of the federal legislative power has the right to propose leg-
       islation.   
        Except for those matters described in Article 77, draft bills submitted to 
       the Houses following the King’s initiative are tabled with the House of Repre-
       sentatives and are then sent to the Senate.   
        Draft bills relating to the approval of treaties submitted to the Houses fol-
       lowing the King’s initiative are tabled with the Senate and then sent to the 
       House of Representatives.”. 
        
                        Article 76   
        
        A draft bill may be adopted by a House only after having been voted on 
       article by article.   
        The Houses have the right to amend and to split the articles and amend-
       ments proposed.   
        The Rules of Procedure of the House of Representatives provide for a sec-
       ond reading procedure.   
        
                                             33 
        Transitional provision   
        
        The third paragraph comes into force on the day when elections take 
       place with a view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional 
       Parliaments in 2014.   
        
                        Article 77   
        
        The House of Representatives and the Senate are equally competent with 
       respect to: 
        1°  declaring that there are reasons to revise such constitutional provi-
          sion as they determine, and with respect to revising and co-ordinating 
          the Constitution; 
        2°  matters that must be settled by both legislative Houses by virtue of 
          the Constitution; 
        3°  the laws to be passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last par-
          agraph; 
        4°  the laws relating to the institutions and financing of  the German-
          speaking Community; 
        5°  the laws relating to the financing of political parties and the control 
          of electoral expenditure; 
        6°  the laws relating to the organisation of the Senate and the senator’s 
          status. 
        A law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph may 
       designate other matters for which the House of Representatives and the Sen-
       ate are equally competent.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “The House of Representatives and the Senate are equally competent 
       with respect to: 
        1°  declaring that there are reasons to revise such constitutional provi-
          sion as they determine, and with respect to such constitutional revi-
          sion; 
       34 
        2°  matters that must be settled by both legislative Houses by virtue of 
          the Constitution; 
        3°  the laws described in Articles 5, 39, 43, 50, 68, 71, 77, 82, 115, 117, 118, 
          121, 123, 127 to 131, 135 to 137, 140 to 143, 145, 146, 163, 165, 166, 
          167, § 1, third sub-paragraph, § 4 and § 5, 169, 170, § 2, second sub-
          paragraph, § 3, second and third sub-paragraphs, § 4, second sub-
          paragraph, and 175 to 177, as well as the laws enacted in order to ex-
          ecute the above-mentioned laws and articles; 
        4°  the laws to be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last par-
          agraph, as well as the laws enacted in order to execute such laws; 
        5°  the laws referred to in Article 34; 
        6°  the laws approving treaties; 
        7°  the laws adopted in accordance with Article 169, to guarantee that in-
          ternational or supranational commitments are observed; 
        8°  the laws relating to the Council of State; 
        9°  the organisation of the courts; 
        10° the laws approving cooperation agreements between the State, the 
          Communities and the Regions. 
        A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph may 
       designate other laws for which the House of Representatives and the Senate 
       are equally competent.”. 
        
                        Article 78 
        
        § 1. With the reservation of what is provided for in Article 77, draft bills 
       adopted by the House of Representatives with respect to the following mat-
       ters are sent to the Senate: 
        1°  the laws enacted in order to execute laws to be passed by a majority 
          as described in Article 4, last paragraph; 
        2°  the laws described in Articles 5, 39, 115, 117, 118, 121, 123, 127 to 129, 
          131, 135 to 137, 141 to 143, 163, 165, 166, 167, § 1, third sub-para-
          graph, 169, 170, § 2, second sub-paragraph, § 3, second and third sub-
          paragraphs, and § 4, second sub-paragraph, 175 and 177, as well as 
          the laws enacted in order to execute the above-mentioned laws, with 
          the exception of the legislation on the organisation of automated vot-
          ing; 
        3°  the laws passed in accordance with Article 169, to guarantee that in-
          ternational and supranational commitments are observed; 
                                             35 
        4°  the laws relating to the Council of State and the federal administra-
          tive courts. 
        A law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph may 
       designate other matters that the Senate can examine according to the pro-
       cedure as described in this article.   
        
        § 2. The Senate examines the draft bill at the request of the majority of its 
       members, including at least a third of the members of each linguistic group. 
       This request is made within fifteen days from the receipt of the bill.   
        The Senate may, within no more than thirty days: 
        - decide that there is no ground to amend the bill; 
        - adopt the bill after having amended it. 
        If the Senate does not pronounce on the bill within the time allotted, or if 
       it has informed the House of Representatives of its decision not to amend, 
       the bill is sent by the House of Representatives to the King.   
        If the bill has been amended, the Senate sends it to the House of Repre-
       sentatives, which makes a final decision by either passing or amending it.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “In other matters than those described in Articles 74 and 77, draft bills 
       adopted by the House of Representatives are sent to the Senate.   
        At the request of at least fifteen senators, the Senate examines the draft 
       bills. This request is made within fifteen days of the draft bill being received.   
        The Senate may, within no more than sixty days: 
        - decide not to amend the draft bill; 
        - adopt the bill after having amended it. 
        If the Senate does not pronounce on the bill within the time allotted, or if 
       the Senate has informed the House of Representatives of its decision not to 
       amend, the bill is sent by the House of Representatives to the King.   
        If the bill has been amended, the Senate sends it to the House of Repre-
       sentatives, which makes a final decision by either adopting or rejecting all or 
       some of the amendments adopted by the Senate.”. 
        
       36 
                        Article 79   
        
        [Repealed]   
        
                        Article 80   
        
        [Repealed]   
        
                        Article 81   
        
        [Repealed]   
        
                        Article 82   
        
        A Parliamentary consultation committee composed equally of members 
       of the House of Representatives and of the Senate settles conflicts of compe-
       tence that arise between the two Houses and may, by mutual agreement, ex-
       tend the examination deadline set in Article 78 at any time.   
        If no majority exists in the two groups composing the committee, the lat-
       ter makes its decision by a majority of two thirds of its members.   
        A law determines the composition and functioning of the committee, as 
       well as the way of calculating the time limits set in Article 78.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments. 
       Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
         
        “A Parliamentary consultation committee composed equally of members 
       of the House of Representatives and of the Senate settles conflicts of compe-
       tence that arise between the two Houses and may, by mutual agreement, ex-
       tend the examination deadlines set in Articles 78 to 81 at any time. 
        In no majority exists in the two groups composing the committee, the lat-
       ter makes its decision by a majority of two thirds of its members. 
        A law determines the composition and functioning of the committee, as 
       well as the way of calculating the time limits set in Articles 78 to 81.”. 
        
                                             37 
                        Article 83 
        
       Each private member’s bill and each Government bill mentions whether it 
       concerns a matter described in Article 74, Article 77 or Article 78. 
        
                        Article 84 
        
       Only the law can give an authoritative interpretation of laws. 
        
        
                       CHAPTER III 
        
               ON THE KING AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
        
                        SECTION I 
        
                       ON THE KING 
        
        
                        Article 85 
        
        The constitutional powers of the King are hereditary through the direct, 
       natural and legitimate descent from H.M. Leopold, George, Christian, Freder-
       ick of Saxe-Coburg, by order of primogeniture.   
        The descendant mentioned in the first paragraph who marries without 
       the King’s consent or, in his absence, without the consent of those exercising 
       the King’s powers in cases provided for by the Constitution shall be deprived 
       of his right to the crown.   
        Nonetheless, this right may be restored by the King or, in his absence, by 
       those exercising the powers of the King in cases provided for by the Consti-
       tution, but only with the assent of both Houses.   
        
                        Article 86   
        
        For lack of a descendant of H.M. Leopold, George, Christian, Frederick of 
       Saxe-Coburg, the King may appoint his successor, the assent of the Houses, 
       in the manner described in Article 87.   
       38 
        In the absence of an appointment made in the manner described above, 
       the throne is considered vacant.   
        
                        Article 87   
        
        The King may not at the same time act as head of another State without 
       the consent of both Houses.   
        Neither House may deliberate on this matter unless two thirds of its mem-
       bers are present, and the resolution is only adopted if it attracts at least two 
       thirds of the votes.   
        
                        Article 88 
        
        The King’s person is inviolable; his ministers are accountable.   
        
                        Article 89 
        
        The law determines the civil list for the duration of each reign.   
        
                        Article 90   
        
        Upon the death of the King, the Houses meet without being convened at 
       the latest on the tenth day after his death. If the Houses have been dissolved 
       previously, and if the act of dissolution convenes them to meet later than the 
       tenth day following the King’s death, the members of the former Houses take 
       up their seats again until the meeting of those who will replace them.   
        From the death of the King until the oath is sworn by his successor to the 
       throne or by the Regent, the King’s constitutional powers are exercised, in 
       the name of the Belgian people, by the ministers meeting in council, and un-
       der their responsibility.   
                            
                        Article 91   
        
        The King attains his majority upon his eighteenth birthday.   
        The King only accedes to the throne after having sworn the following oath 
       before the united Houses:   
        “I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Belgian people, to 
       preserve the country’s national independence and its territorial integrity.”.   
                                             39 
                        Article 92   
        
        If upon the death of the King, his successor is a minor, the two Houses 
       meet as a single assembly to appoint a Regent and a Guardian.   
                            
                        Article 93   
        
        If the King finds himself unable to reign, the ministers, having had this in-
       ability stated, immediately convene the Houses. The Regent and Guardian 
       are appointed by the joint Houses.   
        
                        Article 94 
        
        Only one person may be Regent. 
        The Regent takes up office only after having sworn the oath as prescribed 
       in Article 91.   
        
                        Article 95   
        
        If the throne is vacant, the Houses, deliberating as one assembly, provi-
       sionally appoint a Regent, until the convening of the fully renewed Houses; 
       this meeting must take place within two months. The new Houses, deliberat-
       ing as one assembly, fill the vacancy.   
        
        
                       SECTION II 
        
                   ON THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
        
        
                        Article 96 
        
        The King appoints and dismisses his ministers.   
        The Federal Government offers its resignation to the King if the House of 
       Representatives, by an absolute majority of its members, adopts a motion of 
       no-confidence proposing a successor to the prime minister for appointment 
       by the King or proposes a successor to the prime minister for appointment 
       by the King within three days of the rejection of a motion of confidence. The 
       40 
       King appoints the proposed successor as prime minister, who takes office 
       when the new Federal Government is sworn in.   
        
                        Article 97 
        
        Only Belgians may be ministers.   
        
                        Article 98 
        
        No member of the royal family may be a minister.   
                            
                        Article 99   
        
        The Council of Ministers is composed of no more than fifteen members.   
        With the possible exception of the prime minister, the Council of Ministers 
       is composed of an equal number of Dutch-speaking members and French-
       speaking members.   
        
                        Article 100 
        
        Ministers have access to both Houses and must be heard whenever they 
       so request.   
        The House of Representatives may require the presence of ministers. The 
       Senate may require their presence for the matters mentioned in Article 77 or 
       78. For other matters, it may request their presence.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The second sentence of the second paragraph comes into force on the 
       day when elections take place with a view to the complete renewal of the 
       Community and Regional Parliaments in 2014. Until this day, the following 
       provision applies, without prejudice to the first paragraph and the first and 
       last sentences of the second paragraph: 
        
        “The Senate may require their presence for discussion of a Government 
       bill or private member’s bill as mentioned in Article 77 or a Government bill 
       as mentioned in Article 78 or for the exercise of its right of inquiry as men-
       tioned in Article 56.”. 
                                             41 
                        Article 101   
        
        Ministers are accountable to the House of Representatives.   
        No minister can be prosecuted or be the subject of any investigation with 
       regard to opinions expressed by him in the exercise of his duties.   
        
                        Article 102   
        
        In no circumstances may a written or oral order of the King exempt a min-
       ister from his accountability.   
        
                        Article 103   
        
        Ministers are tried exclusively by the appeal court for offences they have 
       allegedly committed in the exercise of their duties. The same rule applies in 
       the case of offences allegedly committed by ministers outside the exercise of 
       their duties and for which they are tried during the exercise of their duties. As 
       the case may be, Articles 59 and 120 are not applicable.   
        The law determines the manner of proceeding against them, both when 
       they are prosecuted and when they are tried.   
        The law designates the appeal court having jurisdiction, which sits in 
       banc, and specifies its composition. The judgments of the appeal court can 
       be appealed to the united chambers of the Supreme Court, which does not 
       pronounce on the merits of the case.   
        Only the public prosecutor to the appeal court that has jurisdiction may 
       institute and lead criminal proceedings against a minister.   
        Authorisation by the House of Representatives is required for any public 
       prosecutor’s request to refer the minister concerned to a particular court or 
       to discharge him, for his direct summons before the appeal court and, except 
       in a case of a flagrant offence, for his arrest.   
        The law determines the procedure to be followed when Articles 103 and 
       125 are both applicable.   
        A pardon may be granted to a minister convicted in accordance with the 
       first paragraph only upon request by the House of Representatives.   
        The law determines in which cases and in accordance with which rules 
       injured parties may institute a civil action.   
        
                          
       42 
        Transitional provision   
        
        The present article is not applicable to acts which have been the subject 
       of a preliminary judicial investigation or to proceedings instituted prior to the 
       entry into force of the law implementing the article.   
        In such a case, the following rule applies: the House of Representatives 
       has the right to indict ministers and to bring them before the Supreme Court. 
       Only the united chambers of this court have jurisdiction to try ministers in 
       cases covered by the criminal laws and by application of the penalties pre-
       scribed by such laws. The Law of 17 December 1996 concerning the tempo-
       rary and partial implementation of Article 103 of the Constitution remains 
       applicable in such cases.   
                            
                        Article 104   
        
        The King appoints and dismisses the federal secretaries of State.   
        These are members of the Federal Government. They do not form part of 
       the Council of Ministers. They are deputies to a minister.   
        The King determines their duties and the limits within which they may re-
       ceive the right to countersign.   
        Constitutional provisions that apply to ministers apply equally to federal 
       secretaries of State, with the exception of Articles 90, second paragraph, 93 
       and 99.   
        
        
                       SECTION III 
        
                     ON RESPONSIBILITIES 
        
        
                        Article 105 
        
        The King has no powers other than those formally attributed to him by 
       the Constitution and by specific laws passed by virtue of the Constitution it-
       self.   
        
                          
                                             43 
                        Article 106 
        
        No act of the King can take effect without the countersignature of a min-
       ister, who, in doing so, assumes responsibility for it.   
        
                        Article 107   
        
        The King bestows ranks within the army.   
        He appoints civil servants to positions in the general and foreign affairs 
       administrations of the State, but for those exceptions created by the laws.   
        He makes appointments to other positions only by virtue of specific legal 
       provisions.   
                            
                        Article 108   
        
        The King makes decrees and regulations required for the execution of 
       laws, without ever having the power either to suspend the laws themselves 
       or to grant dispensation from their execution.   
        
                        Article 109 
        
        The King sanctions and promulgates laws.   
                            
                        Article 110   
        
        The King has the right to remit or to reduce sentences passed by judges, 
       except with regard to what has been ruled on concerning ministers and 
       members of the Community and Regional Governments.   
                            
                        Article 111   
        
        The King may not pardon a minister or a member of a Community or Re-
       gional Government convicted by the Supreme Court, except at the request of 
       the House of Representatives or of the Parliament concerned.   
        
                        Article 112 
        
        The King may mint money, in execution of the law.   
       44 
                        Article 113 
        
        The King may confer titles of nobility, without ever having the power to 
       attach privileges to them.   
        
                        Article 114 
        
        The King grants military orders, with consideration of the rules laid down 
       by the law.   
        
        
                       CHAPTER IV 
        
                  ON COMMUNITIES AND REGIONS 
        
                        SECTION I 
        
                        ON BODIES 
        
                       SUB-SECTION I 
               ON COMMUNITY AND REGIONAL PARLIAMENTS 
        
        
                        Article 115 
        
        § 1. There is a Parliament of the Flemish Community, called the Flemish 
       Parliament, and a Parliament of the French Community, the composition and 
       functioning of which are determined by a law adopted by a majority as de-
       scribed in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        There is a Parliament of the German-speaking Community, the composi-
       tion and functioning of which are determined by the law.   
        
        § 2. Without prejudice to Article 137, the regional bodies referred to in Ar-
       ticle 39 include a Parliament for each Region.   
        
                          
                                             45 
                        Article 116   
        
        § 1. The Community and Regional Parliaments are composed of elected 
       representatives.   
        
        § 2. Each Community Parliament is composed of members elected di-
       rectly as members of the Community Parliament concerned or as members 
       of a Regional Parliament. 
        Except when Article 137 is applied, each Regional Parliament is composed 
       of members elected directly as members of the Regional Parliament con-
       cerned or as members of a Community Parliament. 
        
                        Article 117 
        
        Members of the Community and Regional Parliaments are elected for a 
       period of five years. The Community and Regional Parliaments are re-elected 
       as a whole every five years.   
        Elections for the Community and Regional Parliaments take place on the 
       same day and coincide with elections for the European Parliament.   
        In execution of a law as described in Article 118, § 2, fourth sub-para-
       graph, a federate law or a rule referred to in Article 134, passed in accordance 
       with Article 118, § 2, fourth sub-paragraph, may derogate from the first and 
       second paragraphs. 
        
                        Article 118   
        
        § 1. Elections referred to in Article 116, § 2, as well as the composition and 
       functioning of Community and Regional Parliaments are regulated by the 
       law. Except for the Parliament of the German-speaking Community, such a 
       law is adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        § 2. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph 
       designates those matters relating to the election, composition and function-
       ing of the Brussels-Capital Region Parliament, the Flemish Community Par-
       liament, the French Community Parliament and the Walloon Region Parlia-
       ment which these Parliaments regulate, each for itself, either by federate law 
       or by rule as referred to in Article 134, according to the case. This federate law 
       and this rule as referred to in Article 134 are adopted by a two-thirds majority 
       46 
       of the votes cast, provided that a majority of the members of the Parliament 
       concerned is present.   
        The law as described in the first sub-paragraph determines additional 
       majority requirements with respect to the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital 
       Region.   
        A law designates those matters relating to the election, composition and 
       functioning of the Parliament of the German-speaking Community which this 
       Parliament regulates by federate law. This federate law is adopted by a two-
       thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that a majority of the members of 
       the Parliament is present.   
        The law as described in the first or third sub-paragraph, according to the 
       case, may entitle the Community and Regional Parliaments to determine, 
       each for itself, by federate law or rule referred to in Article 134, according to 
       the case, the duration of the term for which they are elected and the date of 
       their election. This federate law and rule referred to in Article 134 are adopted 
       by majorities as described in the first to third sub-paragraphs.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        After elections for the European Parliament have been held in 2014, a law 
       passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph sets the date on 
       which § 2, fourth sub-paragraph, comes into force. This date is that on which 
       Article 46, sixth paragraph and Article 65, third paragraph come into force.   
        
                       Article 118bis 
        
        Within the national borders, the members of the Regional and Commu-
       nity Parliaments, referred to in Articles 2 and 3, have the right to free travel 
       on all means of transport operated or conceded by the public authorities.   
        
                        Article 119   
        
        A member of a Community or Regional Parliament cannot be at the same 
       time a member of the House of Representatives. Moreover, neither can he be 
       a senator as referred to in Article 67, § 1, 6° and 7°.   
        
                          
                                             47 
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on the day when elections take place with a 
       view to the complete renewal of the Community and Regional Parliaments in 
       2014. Until this day, the following provisions apply: 
        
        “A member of a Community or Regional Parliament cannot be at the same 
       time a member of the House of Representatives. Moreover, neither can he be 
       a senator as referred to in Article 67, § 1, 1°, 2°, 6° and 7°.”. 
                            
                        Article 120 
        
        All members of Community and Regional Parliaments benefit from the 
       immunities described in Articles 58 and 59. 
        
        
                       SUB-SECTION II 
               ON COMMUNITY AND REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS 
        
        
                        Article 121 
        
        § 1. There is a Government of the Flemish Community and a Government 
       of the French Community, the composition and functioning of which are de-
       termined by a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last para-
       graph.   
        There is a Government of the German-speaking Community, the compo-
       sition and functioning of which are determined by the law.   
        
        § 2. Without prejudice to Article 137, the regional bodies referred to in Ar-
       ticle 39 include a Government for each Region.   
        
                        Article 122 
        
        Members of each Community or Regional Government are elected by 
       their Parliament.   
        
                          
       48 
                        Article 123   
        
        § 1. The law establishes the composition and functioning of the Commu-
       nity and Regional Governments. Except with regard to the Government of the 
       German-speaking Community, this law is adopted by a majority as described 
       in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        § 2. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph 
       designates those matters relating to the composition and functioning of the 
       Brussels-Capital Region Government, the Flemish Community Government, 
       the French Community Government and the Walloon Region Government 
       which their Parliaments regulate, each one in so far as it is concerned, either 
       by federate law or by rule as referred to in Article 134, according to the case. 
       This federate law and this rule referred to in Article 134 are adopted by a two-
       thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that a majority of the members of 
       the Parliament concerned is present.   
        The law as described in the first sub-paragraph determines additional 
       majority requirements with respect to the Parliament of the Brussels Capital 
       Region.   
        A law designates those matters relating to the composition and function-
       ing of the government of the German-speaking Community which the Parlia-
       ment of this  Community regulates by federate law. This federate law is 
       adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, provided that a majority 
       of the members of the Parliament is present.   
        
                        Article 124   
        
        No member of a Community or Regional Government can be prosecuted 
       or be the subject of any investigation with regard to opinions expressed and 
       votes cast by him in the exercise of his duties.   
        
                        Article 125   
        
        Members of a Community or Regional Government are tried exclusively 
       by the appeal court for offences they have allegedly committed in the exer-
       cise of their duties. The same rule applies in the case of offences allegedly 
       committed by members of a Community or Regional Government outside 
       the exercise of their duties and for which they are tried during the exercise of 
                                             49 
       their duties. As the case may be, Articles 120 and 59 are not applicable.   
        The law determines the manner of proceeding against them, both when 
       they are prosecuted and when they are tried.   
        The law designates the appeal court that has jurisdiction, which sits in 
       banc, and specifies its composition. The judgments of the appeal court can 
       be appealed to the united chambers of the Supreme Court, which does not 
       pronounce on the merits of the case.   
        Only the public prosecutor to the appeal court having jurisdiction may in-
       stitute and lead criminal proceedings against a member of a Community or 
       of a Regional Government.   
        Authorisation by the Parliament of the Community or Region, each one 
       for matters of its concern, is required for any public prosecutor’s request to 
       refer the member concerned to a particular court or to discharge him, for his 
       direct summons before the appeal court and, except in a case of a flagrant 
       offence, for his arrest.   
        The law determines the procedure to be followed when Articles 103 and 
       125 are both applicable and when there is a double application of Article 125.   
        A pardon may be granted to a member of a Community or Regional Gov-
       ernment convicted in accordance with the first paragraph only upon request 
       by the Community or Regional Parliament concerned.   
        The law determines in which cases and in accordance with which rules 
       injured parties may bring a civil action.   
        The laws referred to in the present article must be adopted by a majority 
       as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The present article is not applicable to acts which have been the subject 
       of a preliminary judicial investigation or to proceedings instituted prior to the 
       entry into force of the law implementing the article.   
        In such a case, the following rule applies: the Community or Regional Par-
       liament concerned has the right to indict members of their Government and 
       to bring them before the Supreme Court. Only the united chambers of this 
       court have jurisdiction to try ministers in cases covered by the criminal laws 
       and by application of the penalties prescribed by such laws. The special Law 
       of 28 February 1997 concerning the temporary and partial implementation of 
       Article 125 of the Constitution remains applicable in such cases.   
        
       50 
                        Article 126   
        
        Constitutional provisions that apply to members of the Regional and 
       Community Governments, as well as the implementing laws referred to in Ar-
       ticle 125, last paragraph apply equally to Regional secretaries of State.   
        
        
                       SECTION II 
        
                     ON RESPONSIBILITIES 
        
                       SUB-SECTION I 
               ON THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMUNITIES 
        
        
                        Article 127 
        
        § 1. The Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities, each one in 
       so far as it is concerned, regulate by federate law: 
        1°  cultural matters; 
        2°  education, with the exception of: 
          a) the setting of the beginning and of the end of compulsory educa-
       tion; 
          b) minimum standards for the granting of diplomas;   
          c) the pension scheme; 
        3°  cooperation between the Communities, as well as international co-
          operation, including the concluding of treaties for those matters re-
          ferred to in 1° and 2°. 
        A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph des-
       ignates the cultural matters referred to in 1° and determines the forms of co-
       operation referred to in 3°, as well as the specific arrangements for the con-
       cluding of treaties referred to in 3°.   
        
        § 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the Dutch-speaking and 
       French-speaking regions respectively, as well as in those institutions estab-
       lished in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital which, because of their ac-
       tivities, must be considered as belonging exclusively to one Community or 
                                             51 
       the other.   
        
                        Article 128   
        
        § 1. The Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities regulate by 
       federate law, each one in so far as it is concerned, person-related matters, as 
       well as, in such matters, cooperation between the Communities and interna-
       tional cooperation, including the concluding of treaties.   
        A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph des-
       ignates such person-related matters and determines the forms of coopera-
       tion, as well as the specific arrangements for the concluding of treaties.   
         
        § 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the Dutch-speaking and 
       French-speaking regions respectively, as well as – unless a law adopted by a 
       majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph determines otherwise – with 
       regard to those institutions established in the bilingual region of Brussels-
       Capital which, because of their organisation, must be considered as belong-
       ing exclusively to one Community or the other.   
        
                        Article 129 
        
        § 1. The Parliaments of the Flemish and French Communities, to the ex-
       clusion of the federal legislator, regulate by federate law, each one as far as 
       it is concerned, the use of languages for: 
        1°  administrative matters; 
        2°  education in the establishments created, subsidised or recognised by 
          the public authorities; 
        3°  social relations between employers and their personnel, as well as 
          company acts and documents required by the law and by regulations. 
        
        § 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the Dutch-speaking and 
       French-speaking regions respectively, except as concerns:   
           
        —the municipalities or groups of municipalities adjacent to another lin-
          guistic Region and in which the law prescribes or permits the use of 
          another language than that of the Region in which they are located. 
          For these municipalities, a change to the rules governing the use of 
          languages in the matters as described in § 1 may be made only by a 
          law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph;   
       52 
           
        —services whose activities extend beyond the linguistic region within 
          which they are located;   
           
        —federal and international institutions designated by the law whose 
          activities are common to more than one Community.   
        
                        Article 130   
        
        § 1. The Parliament of the German-speaking Community regulates by fed-
       erate law: 
        1°  cultural matters; 
        2°  person-related matters; 
        3°  education, within the limits established by Article 127, § 1, first sub-
          paragraph, 2°; 
        4°  cooperation between the Communities, as well as international co-
          operation, including the conclusion of treaties, for matters referred to 
          in 1°, 2° and 3°; 
        5°  the use of languages for education in establishments created, subsi-
          dised or recognised by the public authorities.   
        The law designates the cultural and person-related matters referred to in 
       1° and 2° and determines the forms of cooperation referred to in 4°, as well 
       as the manner in which treaties are concluded.   
        
        § 2. These federate laws have the force of law in the German-speaking re-
       gion.   
        
                        Article 131   
        
        The law determines the measures designed to prevent all forms of dis-
       crimination for ideological or philosophical reasons.   
        
                        Article 132 
        
        The right to propose legislation belongs to the Community Government 
       and to the members of the Community Parliament.   
        
                        Article 133 
        
        Only the federate law can give an authoritative interpretation of federate 
                                             53 
       laws.   
        
        
                       SUB-SECTION II 
                 ON THE COMPETENCES OF THE REGIONS 
        
        
                        Article 134 
        
        Laws passed in order to execute Article 39 determine the judicial force of 
       the rules which the bodies that they create enact in matters which they de-
       termine.   
        They can confer to these bodies the power to pass federate laws that have 
       the force of law, within the jurisdiction and in the manner that they deter-
       mine.   
        
        
                      SUB-SECTION III 
                     SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
        
        
                        Article 135   
        
        A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph des-
       ignates the authorities which exercise for the bilingual region of Brussels-
       Capital the competences not assigned to the Communities in the matters re-
       ferred to in Article 128, § 1.   
        
                       Article 135bis   
        
        A law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph can 
       attribute to the Region of Brussels-Capital, for the bilingual region of Brus-
       sels-Capital, powers that have not been assigned to the Communities in the 
       matters referred to in Article 127, § 1, first sub-paragraph, 1° and in the same 
       sub-paragraph, 3°, insofar as this 3° concerns matters referred to in the afore-
       said 1°.   
        
       54 
                        Article 136   
        
        There are linguistic groups within the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital 
       Region, as well as executive colleges, responsible for Community matters; 
       their composition, functioning and competences and, without prejudice to 
       Article 175, their financing are regulated by a law adopted by a majority as 
       described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        The colleges together form the United College, which acts as a consulta-
       tion and coordination body between the two Communities.   
        
                        Article 137   
        
        With a view to the application of Article 39, the Parliaments of the Flemish 
       and French Communities, as well as their respective Governments, may ex-
       ercise the competences, respectively, of the Flemish Region and of the Wal-
       loon Region, under the conditions and according to the terms set by the law. 
       This law must be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last para-
       graph.   
        
                        Article 138   
        
        The Parliament of the French Community, on one hand, and the Parlia-
       ment of the Walloon Region and the French linguistic group of the Parliament 
       of the Brussels-Capital Region, on the other hand, may decide by common 
       accord and each by federate law, that in the French-speaking region, the Par-
       liament and the Government of the Walloon Region and, in the bilingual re-
       gion of Brussels-Capital, the French linguistic group of the Parliament of the 
       Brussels-Capital Region and its executive college exercise, in full or in part, 
       competences of the French Community.   
        These federate laws are adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast 
       within the Parliament of the French Community and by absolute majority of 
       the votes cast within the Parliament of the Walloon Region and within the 
       French linguistic group in the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region, pro-
       vided that a majority of the Parliament members or of the members of the 
       linguistic group concerned is present. They can regulate the financing of the 
       competences which they designate, as well as the transfer of personnel, as-
       sets, rights and obligations linked with these competences.   
                                             55 
           These competences are exercised, according to the case, by means of fed-
        erate laws, decisions or regulations.   
         
                               Article 139   
         
           Upon proposal by their respective Governments, the Parliament of the 
        German-speaking Community and the Parliament of the Walloon Region can, 
        each by federate law, decide by common accord that the Parliament and the 
        Government of the German-speaking Community exercise, in whole or in 
        part, competences of the Walloon Region.   
           These competences are exercised, according to the case, by means of fed-
        erate laws, decisions or regulations.   
         
                               Article 140 
         
           The Parliament and the Government of the German-speaking Community 
        exercise by means of decisions and regulations all other competences at-
        tributed to them by the law.   
           Article 159 is applicable to these decisions and regulations.   
         
         
                              CHAPTER V 
         
                ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT, AND THE PREVENTION 
                        AND RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS 
         
                              SECTION I 
         
                  ON THE PREVENTION OF CONFLICTS OF COMPETENCE 
         
         
                               Article 141   
         
           The law organises a procedure to prevent conflicts between laws, feder-
        ate laws and rules referred to in Article 134, as well as between federate laws 
        themselves and between the rules referred to in Article 134 themselves.   
         
        56 
                       SECTION II 
        
                   ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT 
        
        
                        Article 142   
        
        There is for all Belgium a Constitutional Court, the composition, compe-
       tences and functioning of which are established by the law.   
        This Court rules by means of judgments on:   
        1°  those conflicts referred to in Article 141;   
        2°  the violation of Articles 10, 11 and 24 by a law, a federate law or a rule 
          as referred to in Article 134;   
        3°  the violation of constitutional articles that the law determines by a 
          law, a federate law or by a rule as referred to in Article 134.   
        A matter may be referred to the Court by any authority designated by the 
       law, by any person that can prove an interest or, pre-judicially, by any court.   
        The Court pronounces by a ruling, under the conditions and according to 
       the terms specified by the law, on every referendum described in Article 39bis 
       before it is organised.   
        In the cases, under the conditions and according to the terms that it spec-
       ifies, the law can give the Court competence to pronounce by a judgment on 
       appeals lodged against decisions made by legislative assemblies or bodies 
       thereof regarding the control of electoral expenditure incurred in the elec-
       tions for the House of Representatives.   
        The laws referred to in the first paragraph, in the second paragraph, 3° 
       and in the third to fifth paragraphs are adopted by a majority as described in 
       Article 4, last paragraph. 
        
        
                          
                                             57 
                       SECTION III 
        
          ON THE PREVENTION AND THE SETTLEMENT OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
        
        
                        Article 143   
        
        § 1. In the exercise of their respective responsibilities, the federal State, 
       the Communities, the Regions and the Joint Community Commission act 
       with respect for federal loyalty, in order to prevent conflicts of interest.   
        
        § 2. The Senate makes decisions, by means of reasoned opinions, on con-
       flicts  of  interest which may arise between the assemblies which legislate 
       through laws, federate laws or rules as referred to in Article 134, under the 
       conditions and in the manner determined by a law adopted by a majority as 
       referred to in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        § 3. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph 
       organises a procedure designed to prevent and to settle conflicts of interest 
       between the Federal Government, the Community and Regional Govern-
       ments and the United College of the Joint Community Commission.   
        
        § 4. The procedures described in §§ 2 and 3 do not apply to laws, decrees, 
       regulations, acts and decisions of the Federal State relating to the basis of 
       taxation, tax rates and exemptions, and any other element playing a role in 
       the computation of the personal income tax.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        Concerning the prevention and the settlement of conflicts of interest, the 
       ordinary law of 9 August 1980 on institutional reforms remains valid; how-
       ever, it can only be repealed, completed, corrected or replaced by those laws 
       mentioned in §§ 2 and 3.   
        
        
                          
       58 
                       CHAPTER VI 
        
                     ON JUDICIAL POWER 
        
        
                        Article 144   
        
        Disputes about civil rights belong exclusively to the competence of the 
       courts.   
        However, the law can empower the Council of State or federal adminis-
       trative courts, in accordance with the terms it specifies, to rule on the effects 
       that their decisions have with respect to civil law.   
        
                        Article 145   
        
        Disputes about political rights belong to the competence of the courts, 
       except for the exceptions established by the law. 
        
                        Article 146   
        
        A court and a body capable of rendering judgment can only be estab-
       lished by virtue of a law. No extraordinary courts or commissions may be cre-
       ated, no matter under which designation.   
        
                        Article 147   
        
        There is a Supreme Court for all Belgium.   
        This Court has no competence over the substance of the case.   
        
                        Article 148 
        
        Court hearings are public, unless such public access endangers morals or 
       the peace; if such is the case, the Court so declares in a judgment.   
        In cases of political or press offences, proceedings can only be conducted 
       in camera on the basis of a unanimous vote.   
        
                          
                                             59 
                        Article 149   
        
        Each judgment is supported by reasons. It is made public according to the 
       terms specified by the law. In criminal matters, the operative part is pro-
       nounced publicly.   
        
                        Article 150   
        
        A jury is sworn in for all criminal matters, as well as for political and press 
       offences, with the exception of press offences motivated by racism or xeno-
       phobia.   
        
                        Article 151   
        
        § 1. Judges are independent in the exercise of their jurisdictional compe-
       tences. The public prosecutor is independent in conducting individual inves-
       tigations and prosecutions, without prejudice to the right of the competent 
       minister to order prosecutions and to prescribe binding directives on crimi-
       nal policy, including policy on investigations and prosecutions.   
        Moreover, Community and Regional Governments have the right, each 
       one insofar as it is concerned, to order prosecutions regarding matters falling 
       under their responsibility through the Minister referred to in the first para-
       graph. A law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph 
       determines the manner in which they exercise this right.   
        A law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph pro-
       vides for the participation by the Communities and the Regions, in matters 
       falling  under  their  responsibility,  in  the  elaboration  of  the  directives  de-
       scribed in the first sub-paragraph and in planning security policy, and also 
       for the participation of their representatives in the meetings of the College of 
       Public  Prosecutors  General,  insofar  as  these  meetings  have  reference  to 
       these same matters.   
        
        § 2. There is one High Council of Justice for all Belgium. In the exercise of 
       its competences, the High Council of Justice respects the independence re-
       ferred to in § 1.   
        The High Council of Justice is composed of a Dutch-speaking college and 
       of a French-speaking college. Each college comprises an equal number of 
       members and is constituted with equal representation, on the one hand, of 
       60 
               judges and officers of the public prosecutor’s office elected directly by their 
               peers under the conditions and in the manner determined by the law and, on 
               the other hand, of other members appointed by the Senate by a two-thirds 
               majority of the votes cast, under conditions established by the law.   
                   Within each college, there is a nomination and appointment committee, 
               as well as an advisory and investigatory committee, which are constituted 
               with equal representation in accordance with the provision laid down in the 
               preceding paragraph.   
                   The law specifies the composition of the High Council of Justice, of its col-
               leges and of their committees, as well as the conditions under which and the 
               manner in which they exercise their competences.   
                
                   § 3. The High Council of Justice exercises its competences in the following 
               areas: 
                   1°  the nomination of candidates for appointment as judge, as referred 
                       to in § 4, first sub-paragraph or for appointment as officer of the pub-
                       lic prosecutor’s office; 
                   2°  the nomination of candidates for an appointment to the positions re-
                       ferred to in § 5, first sub-paragraph and to the position of head of the 
                       public prosecutor’s office; 
                   3°  access to the position of judge or of officer of the public prosecutor’s 
                       office; 
                   4°  training of judges and of officers of the public prosecutor’s office; 
                   5°  drafting of general profiles for the positions referred to in 2°; 
                   6°  voicing of advice and of proposals concerning the general operation 
                       and organisation of the judiciary; 
                   7°  general surveillance on and the promoting of the use of means of in-
                       ternal control; 
                   8°  to the exclusion of all disciplinary and criminal competences: 
                       –   the receiving and the following-up of complaints relating to the 
                           operation of the judiciary;   
                       –   the conducting of an enquiry on the operation of the judiciary. 
                   Under the conditions and in the manner determined by the law, the com-
               petences referred to in 1° to 4° are assigned to the relevant nomination and 
               appointment committee, and the competences referred to in 5° to 8° are as-
               signed to the relevant advisory and investigatory committee. The law deter-
               mines the cases in which and the manner in which the nomination and ap-
                                                                                                         61 
       pointment committees and the advisory and investigatory committees exer-
       cise their competences jointly.   
        A law to be adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph 
       determines the other competences of this Council.   
        
        § 4. The justices of the peace and the judges of the courts and of the Su-
       preme Court are appointed by the King under the conditions and in the man-
       ner specified by the law.   
        Such appointment is made on reasoned nomination by the relevant nom-
       ination and appointment committee, by a majority of two thirds in accord-
       ance with the terms specified by the law and after evaluation of qualifications 
       and aptitude. The nomination can be rejected only in the manner specified 
       by the law and with justification.   
        In the case of appointment of an appeal judge or of a judge of the Su-
       preme Court, the general assembly of the court concerned issues a reasoned 
       opinion in the manner specified by the law, prior to the nomination referred 
       to in the preceding paragraph.   
        
        § 5. The first president of the Supreme Court, the first presidents of the 
       appeal courts and the presidents of the lower courts are appointed to those 
       positions by the King under the conditions and in the manner specified by 
       the law.   
        Such appointment is made on reasoned nomination by the relevant nom-
       ination and appointment committee, by a majority of two thirds in accord-
       ance with the terms specified by the law and after evaluation of qualifications 
       and aptitude. The nomination may be rejected only in the manner specified 
       by the law and with justification.   
        In the case of appointment to the position of first president of the Su-
       preme Court or of first president of an appeal court, the general assembly of 
       the court concerned issues a reasoned opinion in the manner specified by 
       the law, prior to the nomination referred to in the preceding paragraph.   
        The president of the Supreme Court, the presidents of the sections of this 
       court, the presidents of the divisions of the appeal courts and the vice-presi-
       dents of the lower courts are appointed to their positions by the courts from 
       their midst under the conditions and in the manner specified by the law.   
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 152, the law specifies the dura-
       tion of the appointment to these positions.   
        
       62 
        § 6. In the manner specified by the law, the judges, the incumbents of the 
       positions referred to in § 5, fourth sub-paragraph and the officers of the pub-
       lic prosecutor’s office are subject to an evaluation.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The provisions of §§ 3 to 6 enter into force after the setting up of the High 
       Council of Justice, referred to in § 2.   
        On that date, it is assumed that the first president and the president of 
       the Supreme Court, the presidents of the sections of this court, the first pres-
       idents of the appeal courts, the presidents of the divisions of these courts and 
       the presidents and vice-presidents of the lower courts are appointed to these 
       positions for the duration and under the conditions specified by the law and 
       that they are appointed at the same time to the Supreme Court, to the appeal 
       court or to the labour court and to the corresponding lower court, respec-
       tively.   
        In the meantime, the following provisions remain applicable:   
        The justices of the peace and the judges of the lower courts are appointed 
       directly by the King.   
        The judges of the appeal courts and the presidents and vice-presidents of 
       the courts of first instance under their jurisdiction are appointed by the King 
       from two lists each with two candidates, one submitted by these courts, the 
       other by the provincial councils and the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital 
       Region, depending upon the case.   
        The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the King from two lists 
       each with two candidates, one submitted by the Supreme Court, the other 
       alternately by the House of Representatives and by the Senate.   
        In these two cases, the candidates placed on one list may also appear on 
       the other.   
        All the nominations are made public at least fifteen days before the ap-
       pointment.   
        The courts choose from among themselves their presidents and vice-
       presidents.   
        
                        Article 152   
        
        Judges are appointed for life. They retire at an age determined by the law 
       and receive the pension provided for by the law.   
                                             63 
        No judge can be deprived of his post or suspended except by a court de-
       cision.   
        The transfer of a judge can only take place by his appointment to a new 
       position and with his consent.   
        
                        Article 153   
        
        The King appoints and dismisses officials of the public prosecutor’s of-
       fices attached to the courts.   
         
                         Article 154 
         
        Salaries of members of the judicature are determined by the law.   
        
                        Article 155 
        
        A judge cannot accept a salaried position from a Government, unless this 
       position is exercised free of charge, and even then, such a position must not 
       entail an incompatibility as determined by the law.   
        
                        Article 156   
        
        There are five appeal courts in Belgium:   
        1°  that of Brussels, with jurisdiction over the provinces of Flemish Bra-
          bant, of Walloon Brabant and the bilingual region of Brussels-Capital;   
        2°  that of Ghent, with jurisdiction over the provinces of West Flanders 
          and East Flanders;   
        3°  that of Antwerp, with jurisdiction over the provinces of Antwerp and 
          Limburg;   
        4°  that of Liege, with jurisdiction over the provinces of Liege, Namur and 
          Luxembourg;   
        5°  that of Mons, with jurisdiction over the province of Hainaut.   
        
                        Article 157   
        
        There are military courts when a state of war referred to in Article 167, § 
       1, second sub-paragraph has been stated to exist. The organisation of the 
       military courts, their powers, their members’ rights and obligations as well 
       64 
       as their members’ terms of office are determined by the law.   
        There are commercial courts in the places determined by the law. The law 
       lays down rules for their organisation, their powers, the way their members 
       are appointed as well as their members’ terms of office.   
        The law also lays down rules for the organisation of the labour courts, 
       their powers, the way their members are appointed as well as their members’ 
       terms of office.   
        There are courts for the enforcement of penalties in the places deter-
       mined by the law. The law lays down rules for their organisation, their pow-
       ers, the way their members are appointed as well as their members’ terms of 
       office.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The first paragraph becomes effective on the date of repeal of the Law of 
       15 June 1899 containing Titles I and II of the Military Penal Procedure Code.   
        Until then, the following provision remains effective:   
        Specific laws regulate the organisation of the military courts, their pow-
       ers, their members’ rights and obligations as well as their members’ terms of 
       office.   
        
                       Article 157bis 
        
        Any modification to essential features of the reform regarding the use of 
       languages in judicial matters in the judicial district of Brussels, as well as any 
       modification to features relating to this issue and concerning the public pros-
       ecutor’s office, the Bench and the extent of jurisdiction, may only be made 
       by a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The law determines the date on which this article comes into force. This 
       date is that on which the law of 19 July 2012 reforming the judicial district of 
       Brussels comes into force.   
        
                        Article 158   
        
        The Supreme Court makes decisions in conflicts of powers in the manner 
                                             65 
       provided for by the law.   
        
                        Article 159   
        
        Courts only apply general, provincial or local decisions and regulations 
       provided that they are in accordance with the law.   
        
        
                      CHAPTER VII 
        
            ON THE COUNCIL OF STATE AND ADMINISTRATIVE COURTS 
        
        
                        Article 160   
        
        There is a Council of State for all Belgium, the composition, competences 
       and functioning of which are determined by the law. However, the law can 
       give the King the power to establish the procedure in accordance with the 
       principles that it determines.   
        The Council of State makes decisions by means of judgments as an ad-
       ministrative court and provides an opinion in the cases determined by the 
       law.   
        Any modification to the rules relating to the general assembly of the 
       Council of State’s Administrative Litigation Section which come into force on 
       the same day as this paragraph may only be made by a law passed by a ma-
       jority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        This article comes into force on 14 October 2012.   
        
                        Article 161 
        
        An administrative court can only be established by virtue of a law.   
        
        
                          
       66 
                      CHAPTER VIII 
        
               ON PROVINCIAL AND MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS 
        
        
                        Article 162   
        
        Provincial and municipal institutions are regulated by the law.   
        The law guarantees the application of the following principles:   
        1°  the direct election of the members of provincial and municipal coun-
          cils;   
        2°  the attribution to provincial and municipal councils of all that is of 
          provincial and municipal interest, without prejudice to the approval 
          of their acts in the cases and in the manner that the law determines;   
        3°  the decentralisation of competences to provincial and municipal in-
          stitutions;   
        4°  the  public  nature  of  provincial  and  municipal  council  meetings, 
          within the limits established by the law;   
        5°  the disclosure of accounts and budgets;   
        6°  the intervention of the supervisory authority or of the federal legisla-
          tive power to prevent the law from being violated or public interests 
          from being harmed.   
        Supra-municipal collectivities are governed by the rule referred to in Arti-
       cle 134. This rule enshrines the application of the principles mentioned in the 
       second paragraph. Other principles considered essential can be set by the 
       rule referred to in Article 134, whether or not adopted by a majority of two 
       thirds of the votes cast, under the condition that the majority of the members 
       of the Parliament concerned is present. Articles 159 and 190 are applicable 
       to decisions and regulations of supra-municipal collectivities.”   
        In accordance with a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, 
       last paragraph, the federate law or the rule referred to in Article 134 estab-
       lishes the conditions and the manner in which several provinces, supra-mu-
       nicipal collectivities or municipalities can cooperate or form associations. 
       However, provincial councils, councils of supra-municipal collectivities or 
       municipal councils cannot be permitted to deliberate jointly.   
        
                          
                                             67 
                        Article 163 
        
        The  competences  exercised  in  the  Flemish  and  Walloon  Regions  by 
       elected provincial bodies are exercised, in the bilingual region of Brussels-
       Capital, by the Flemish and French Communities and by the Joint Commu-
       nity Commission, each with respect to matters falling under their responsi-
       bility in pursuance of Articles 127 and 128 and, with respect to other matters, 
       by the Brussels-Capital Region.   
        However, a law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last para-
       graph establishes the detailed rules by which the Brussels-Capital Region or 
       any institution whose members are designated by the latter exercise the 
       competences described in the first paragraph which do not belong to those 
       matters referred to in Article 39. A law adopted by the same majority lays 
       down rules for the attribution to those institutions described in Article 136 of 
       all or part of the competences referred to in the first paragraph that belong 
       to those matters described in Articles 127 and 128.   
        
                        Article 164 
        
        The drafting of registry office certificates relating to civil status and the 
       maintenance of registers fall exclusively under the responsibility of the mu-
       nicipal authorities.   
        
                        Article 165   
        
        § 1. The law creates metropolitan districts and federations of municipali-
       ties. It determines their organisation and their competences and, when doing 
       so, guarantees the application of the principles described in Article 162.   
        Each metropolitan district has a council and an executive college.   
        The president of the executive college is elected by the council from its 
       midst; his election is ratified by the King; the law establishes his status.   
        Articles 159 and 190 apply to the decisions and regulations of the metro-
       politan districts and the federations of municipalities.   
        The boundaries of the metropolitan districts and of the federations of mu-
       nicipalities can only be changed or corrected by virtue of a law.   
        
        § 2. The law creates the body within which each metropolitan district and 
       68 
       the nearest federations of municipalities consult each other under the con-
       ditions and in the manner which the law establishes to examine common 
       problems of a technical nature that fall under their respective competence.   
        
        § 3. Several federations of municipalities may cooperate or form associa-
       tions with each other or with one or more metropolitan districts in accord-
       ance with the conditions and in the manner prescribed by the law to jointly 
       regulate and manage those issues that fall within their competence. Their 
       councils are not permitted to deliberate jointly.   
        
                        Article 166   
        
        § 1. Article 165 applies to the metropolitan district to which the capital of 
       the Kingdom belongs, with the exception of what is provided for hereinafter.   
        
        § 2. The competences of the metropolitan district to which the capital of 
       the Kingdom belongs are, in the manner determined by a law adopted by a 
       majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, exercised by the bodies of 
       the Brussels-Capital Region created by virtue of Article 39.   
        
        § 3. The bodies described in Article 136:   
        1°  possess, each for its Community, the same competences as the other 
          organising powers with respect to cultural, educational and person-
          related matters;   
        2°  exercise,  each  for  its  Community,  the  competences  delegated  to 
          them by the Flemish Community Parliament and by the French Com-
          munity Parliament;   
        3°  jointly regulate those matters described in 1° which are of common 
          interest.   
        
        
                          
                                             69 
                        TITLE IV 
        
                   ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
        
        
                        Article 167   
        
        § 1. The King directs international relations, notwithstanding the compe-
       tence of Communities and Regions to regulate international cooperation, in-
       cluding the concluding of treaties, for those matters that fall within their 
       competences in pursuance of or by virtue of the Constitution.   
        The King commands the armed forces; he states that there exists a state 
       of war or that hostilities have ceased. He notifies the Houses with additional 
       appropriate messages as soon as interests and security of the State permit. 
        Cession, exchange or expansion of territory can only take place by virtue 
       of a law.   
        
        § 2. The King concludes treaties, with the exception of those regarding 
       matters described in § 3.These treaties take effect only after they have re-
       ceived the approval of the House of Representatives.   
        
        § 3. The Community and Regional Governments described in Article 121 
       conclude, each one in so far as it is concerned, treaties regarding matters that 
       fall within the competence of their Parliament. These treaties take effect only 
       after they have received the approval of the Parliament.   
        
        § 4. A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph 
       fixes the specific rules for the concluding of treaties described in § 3 and of 
       the treaties that do not exclusively concern matters falling within the com-
       petence of the Regions or Communities in pursuance of or by virtue of the 
       Constitution.   
        
        § 5. The King, by common consent with the Community or Regional Gov-
       ernments concerned, can denounce treaties concluded before 18 May 1993 
       and covering matters described in § 3.   
        The King denounces these treaties if the Community or Regional Govern-
       ments concerned invite him to do so. A law adopted by a majority as de-
       scribed in Article 4, last paragraph establishes the procedure in the event of 
       70 
       disagreement  between  the  Community  and  Regional  Governments  con-
       cerned.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The second sentence of § 2 comes into force on the day when elections 
       take place with a view to the complete renewal of the Community and Re-
       gional Parliaments in 2014. Until this day, treaties referred to in § 2 take effect 
       only after they have received the approval of both Houses.   
        
                        Article 168   
        
        From the beginning, the Houses are informed of negotiations concerning 
       any revision of the treaties establishing the European Community and the 
       treaties and acts which have modified or complemented them. They receive 
       the draft treaty before its signature.   
        
                       Article 168bis   
        
        With respect to the election of the European Parliament, the law deter-
       mines special rules with a  view to protecting the legitimate interests of 
       French and Dutch-speaking people in the former province of Brabant.   
        The provisions which establish these special rules may only be amended 
       by a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
                        Article 169   
        
        In order to ensure the observance of international or supranational obli-
       gations, the authorities mentioned in Articles 36 and 37 can, provided that 
       the conditions stipulated by the law are met, temporarily replace the bodies 
       mentioned in Articles 115 and 121. This law must be adopted by a majority as 
       described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        
        
                          
                                             71 
                        TITLE V 
        
                       ON FINANCES 
        
        
                        Article 170   
        
        § 1. Taxes to the benefit of the State can only be introduced by a law.   
        
        § 2. Taxes to the benefit of a Community or Region can only be introduced 
       by a federate law or a rule as described in Article 134.   
        The law determines, with respect to the taxes referred to in the first sub-
       paragraph, the exceptions that are proved to be necessary.   
        
        § 3. A charge or tax can only be introduced by a province or a supra-mu-
       nicipal collectivity by the decision of its council.   
        The law determines, with respect to the taxes described in the first para-
       graph, the exceptions that are proved to be necessary.   
        The law can abolish, either totally or partially, the taxes referred to in the 
       first sub-paragraph.   
        
        § 4. A charge or tax can only be introduced by the metropolitan districts, 
       federations of municipalities or by the municipalities by a decision of their 
       council.   
        The law determines, with respect to the taxes referred to in the first sub-
       paragraph, the exceptions that are proved to be necessary.   
        
                        Article 171   
        
        Taxes to the benefit of the State, a Community or a Region are subject to 
       an annual vote.   
        The rules which introduce them are valid only for one year if they are not 
       renewed.   
        
                        Article 172   
        
        No privileges with regard to taxes can be introduced.   
        No exemption or reduction of taxes can be introduced except by a law.   
       72 
                        Article 173   
        
        Except to the benefit of the provinces, the bodies responsible for polders 
       and for draining and flood protection, and except for the cases formally ex-
       cepted by the laws, the federate laws and rules referred to in Article 134, 
       charges can only be claimed from citizens in the form of taxes to the benefit 
       of the State, the Community, the Region, the metropolitan district, the feder-
       ation of municipalities or the municipality.   
        
                        Article 174   
        
        Each year, the House of Representatives passes the law that settles the 
       final accounts and approves the budget. However, the House of Representa-
       tives and the Senate fix, each for itself, their operating allowances annually.   
        All State receipts and expenditure must be included in the budget and in 
       the accounts.   
        
                        Article 175 
        
        A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph es-
       tablishes the system for financing the Flemish Community and the French 
       Community.   
        The Flemish and French Community Parliaments decide by federate law, 
       each one in so far as it is concerned, upon the use of their revenues.   
        
                        Article 176   
        
        A law establishes the system for financing the German-speaking Commu-
       nity.   
        The Parliament of the German-speaking Community decides by federate 
       law upon the use of its revenues.   
        
                        Article 177   
        
        A law adopted by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph es-
       tablishes the system for financing the Regions.   
        Regional Parliaments determine, each one for matters of its concern, the 
       use of their revenues, by means of the rules referred to in Article 134.   
                                             73 
                        Article 178   
        
        Under the conditions and in the manner stipulated by a law adopted by a 
       majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, the Parliament of the Brus-
       sels-Capital Region transfers, by the rule referred to in Article 134, financial 
       means to the Joint Community Commission and to the Flemish and French 
       Community Commissions.   
        
                        Article 179   
        
        No pension or gratuity payable by the public treasury can be attributed 
       other than by virtue of a law.   
        
                        Article 180   
        
        Members of the Court of Audit are appointed by the House of Represent-
       atives for a term established by the law.   
        This Court is responsible for examining and validating the general admin-
       istration accounts and the accounts of all accounting officers answerable to 
       the public treasury. It must see that no budgetary item is surpassed and that 
       no transfers take place. The Court also has general oversight of operations 
       relating to the establishment and collection of entitlements owed to the 
       State, including tax receipts. It clears the accounts of the various State ad-
       ministrations and is responsible for collecting all information and accounting 
       documents needed for that purpose. General accounts of the State are sub-
       mitted to the House of Representatives with the Court of Audit’s observa-
       tions.   
        This Court is organised by the law.   
        The law can entrust the Court of Audit with the control of the budgets and 
       accountancy of the Communities and Regions, as well as of the public inter-
       est bodies which depend on them. It can also permit their control to be reg-
       ulated by the federate law or the rule referred to in Article 134. Except as far 
       as the German-speaking Community is concerned, the said law is passed by 
       the majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph.   
        The law, the federate law of the rule referred to in Article 134 can entrust 
       additional tasks to the Court of Audit. After the Court has agreed to it, the 
       federate law or the rule referred to in Article 134 fixes the fee that is paid to 
       the Court for carrying out these tasks. No fee is due for carrying out a task 
       74 
       that the Court is already performing for a Community or Region before this 
       paragraph comes into force.   
        
                        Article 181   
        
        § 1. The salaries and pensions of ministers of religion are paid for by the 
       State; the amounts required are charged annually to the budget.   
        
        § 2. The salaries and pensions of representatives of organisations recog-
       nised by the law as providing moral assistance according to a non-denomi-
       national philosophical concept are paid for by the State; the amounts re-
       quired are charged annually to the budget.   
        
        
                        TITLE VI 
        
              ON THE ARMED FORCES AND THE POLICE SERVICE 
        
        
                        Article 182   
        
        Army recruitment methods are determined by the law. The law also reg-
       ulates the promotion, the rights and the duties of military personnel.   
        
                        Article 183   
        
        Military quotas are subject to an annual vote. The law that determines 
       them is valid only for one year if it is not renewed.   
        
                        Article 184 
        
        The organisation and competence of the integrated police service, struc-
       tured at two levels, are regulated by the law. The essential features of the 
       status of the members of the personnel of the integrated police service, 
       structured at two levels, are regulated by the law.   
        
                          
                                             75 
        Transitional provision   
        
        However, the King can decide upon and implement the essential features 
       of the status of the members of the personnel of the integrated police service, 
       structured at two levels, provided that this decree, with regard to these fea-
       tures, is confirmed by the law before 30 April 2002.   
        
                        Article 185   
        
        Foreign troops may only be admitted to the service of the State, or occupy 
       or cross the territory by virtue of a law.   
        
                        Article 186   
        
        Military personnel can only be deprived of rank, honours and pensions in 
       the manner described by the law.   
        
        
                        TITLE VII 
        
                    GENERAL PROVISIONS 
        
        
                        Article 187 
        
        The Constitution cannot be wholly or partially suspended.   
                            
                        Article 188   
        
        From the day on which the Constitution becomes enforceable, all laws, 
       decrees, decisions, regulations and other acts that are contrary to it are ab-
       rogated.   
        
                        Article 189 
        
        The text of the Constitution is drafted in Dutch, in French and in German.   
        
                          
       76 
                        Article 190 
        
        No law or decision, or regulation of general, provincial or municipal ad-
       ministration is binding until it has been published in the manner described 
       by the law.   
                            
                        Article 191   
        
        All foreigners on Belgian soil benefit from the protection provided to per-
       sons and property, except for those exceptions provided for by the law.   
                            
                        Article 192   
        
        An oath can only be made obligatory by virtue of a law. The law deter-
       mines the wording.   
                            
                        Article 193   
        
        The Belgian Nation adopts red, yellow and black colours, and as arms of 
       the kingdom the Lion of Belgium with the motto: UNION IS STRENGTH.   
        
                        Article 194 
        
        The city of Brussels is the capital of Belgium and the seat of the Federal 
       Government.   
        
        
                       TITLE VIII 
        
              ON THE REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION 
        
        
                        Article 195   
        
        The federal legislative power has the right to declare that there are rea-
       sons to revise such constitutional provision as it determines.   
        Following  such  a  declaration,  the  two  Houses  are  automatically  dis-
       solved.   
                                             77 
        Two new Houses are then convened, in accordance with Article 46.   
        These Houses make decisions, in common accord with the King, on the 
       points submitted for revision.   
        In this case, the Houses can only debate provided that at least two thirds 
       of the members who make up each House are present; and no change is 
       adopted unless it is supported by at least two thirds of the votes cast.   
        
        Transitional provision   
        
        The Houses, as they were constituted following their full renewal on 13 
       June 2010, may however, in common consent with the King, pronounce on 
       the revision of the following provisions, articles and groups of articles, but 
       only to the effect as indicated hereafter: 
        1°  Articles 5, second paragraph, 11bis, 41, fifth paragraph, 159 and 190, 
          in order to guarantee the full exercise of the Regions’ autonomy to-
          wards the provinces without prejudice neither to the present specific 
          provisions of the law of 9 August 1988 modifying the law on munici-
          palities, the electoral law for municipalities, the law organising public 
          centres for social welfare, the law on provinces, the electoral Code, 
          the electoral law for provinces and the law organising simultaneous 
          elections for the Legislative Houses and the provincial councils, nor 
          to those relating to the office of governor, and in order to limit the 
          meaning of the word “province” used in the Constitution to its sole 
          territorial meaning, to the exclusion of any institutional meaning;   
        2°  Article 23, in order to guarantee the right to child allowances;   
        3°  Title III, in order to insert in it a provision aimed at prohibiting to mod-
          ify election laws less than one year before the date when elections are 
          to be held;   
        4°  Articles 43, § 1, 44, second paragraph, 46, fifth paragraph, 69, 71, 74, 
          75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83 and 168, in order to implement the 
          reform of the bicameral system and entrust the residual legislative 
          powers to the House of Representatives;   
        5°  Articles 46 and 117, in order to provide that the parliamentary elec-
          tions at federal level will take place the same day as the election of 
          the European Parliament and that, in case of early dissolution, the 
          new federal parliamentary term may not extend beyond the day when 
          the election of the European Parliament following this dissolution is 
       78 
          held, as well as in order to permit a law passed by a majority as de-
          scribed in Article 4, last paragraph to entitle the Regions and Commu-
          nities to determine, by special decree or special ordinance, the dura-
          tion of the term for which their Parliaments are elected and the date 
          for  the  election  of  these  Parliaments,  and  to  provide  that  a  law, 
          passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph, fixes the 
          date when the new rules laid down in this division with regard to elec-
          tions will enter into force;   
        6°  Article 63, § 4, in order to supplement it with a sub-paragraph provid-
          ing that, for the election of the House of Representatives, the law es-
          tablishes special rules with a view to protecting the legitimate inter-
          ests of French and Dutch-speaking people in the former province of 
          Brabant, and also providing that the provisions which establish these 
          special rules can only be amended by a law passed by a majority as 
          described in Article 4, last paragraph;   
        7°  Title III, Chapter IV, Section II, Sub-section III, in order to insert in it an 
          article permitting a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, 
          last paragraph to attribute to the Region of Brussels-Capital, for the 
          bilingual region of Brussels-Capital, powers that have not been as-
          signed to the Communities in the matters referred to in Article 127, § 
          1, first sub-paragraph, 1° and in the same sub-paragraph, 3°, insofar 
          as this 3° concerns matters referred to in the aforesaid 1°;   
        8°  Title III, Chapter IV, Section II, Sub-section III, in order to permit a law 
          passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph to sim-
          plify the procedures for cooperation between entities;   
        9°  Article 143, in order to supplement it with a paragraph that precludes 
          the procedure relating to conflicts of interest from being initiated 
          with respect to a law or decision of the federal authority which modi-
          fies the basis of taxation, the tax rate, exemptions or any other ele-
          ment playing a role in the computation of the personal income tax;   
        10° Title III, Chapter VI, in order to insert in it a provision according to 
          which any modification to essential features of the reform regarding 
          the use of languages in judicial matters in the judicial district of Brus-
          sels, as well as any modification to features relating to this issue and 
          concerning the public prosecutor’s office, the Bench and the extent of 
          jurisdiction, may only be made by a law passed by a majority as de-
          scribed in Article 4, last paragraph;   
        11° Article 144, in order to provide that the Council of State and, as the 
                                             79 
          case may be, federal administrative courts may rule on the effects 
          that their decisions have with respect to private law;   
        12° Article 151, § 1, in order to provide that the Communities and the Re-
          gions are entitled to order prosecutions regarding matters falling un-
          der their responsibility through the Minister of Justice, who immedi-
          ately carries out the prosecutions, and in order to permit a law passed 
          by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph to provide for 
          the participation by the Communities and the Regions, in matters fall-
          ing under their responsibility, in decisions concerning the investiga-
          tion and prosecution policy of public prosecutors, the binding guide-
          lines with respect to criminal policy, the representation in the College 
          of Public Prosecutors General, and in decisions concerning the Guide 
          Note on Full Security and the National Security Scheme;   
        13° Article 160, in order to add a paragraph providing that any modifica-
          tion to the new powers granted to the general assembly of the Council 
          of State’s Administrative Litigation Section and any modification to 
          the rules for deliberation in this assembly may only be made by a law 
          passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last paragraph;   
        14° Title IV, in order to insert in it an article providing that, with respect to 
          the election of the European Parliament, the law determines special 
          rules with a view to protecting the legitimate interests of French and 
          Dutch-speaking people in the former province of Brabant, and that 
          the  provisions  which  establish  these  special  rules  can  only  be 
          amended by a law passed by a majority as described in Article 4, last 
          paragraph;   
        15° Article  180,  in  order  to  provide  that  assemblies  which  legislate 
          through federate laws or rules referred to in Article 134 may entrust 
          tasks to the Court of Audit, for which a fee may be charged.   
        The Houses can only debate on the items mentioned in the first para-
       graph provided that at least two thirds of the members who make up each 
       House are present and no change is adopted unless it is supported by at least 
       two thirds of the votes cast.   
        This transitional provision is not to be considered as a declaration in the 
       sense of Article 195, second paragraph.   
        
                        Article 196 
        
        No constitutional revision can be started or pursued during times of war 
       80 
       or when the Houses are prevented from meeting freely on federal territory.   
        
                        Article 197   
        
        During a regency, no changes can be made to the Constitution regarding 
       the constitutional powers of the King and Articles 85 to 88, 91 to 95, 106 and 
       197 of the Constitution.   
        
                        Article 198   
        
        In agreement with the King, the Constituent Houses can change the num-
       bering of articles and of subdivisions of the articles of the Constitution, as 
       well as the subdivisions of the latter into titles, chapters and sections, modify 
       the terminology of provisions not submitted for revision in order to harmo-
       nise them with the terminology of new provisions and to ensure the concord-
       ance of the Dutch, French and German texts of the Constitution.   
        In this case, the Houses can debate only provided that at least two thirds 
       of the members who make up each House are present; and no change will be 
       adopted unless it is supported by at least two thirds of the votes cast.   
        
        
                        TITLE IX 
        
            THE ENTRY INTO FORCE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
        
        
        I. – The provisions of Article 85 will for the first time be applicable to the 
       progeny of H.R.H. Prince Albert, Felix, Humbert, Theodore, Christian, Eugene, 
       Marie, Prince of Liege, Prince of Belgium, it being understood that the mar-
       riage  of  H.R.H.  Princess  Astrid,  Josephine,  Charlotte,  Fabrizia,  Elisabeth, 
       Paola, Marie, Princess of Belgium to Lorenz, Archduke of Austria-Este, is re-
       garded as having obtained the consent described in Article 85, second para-
       graph.   
        Until such time, the following provisions remain in effect.   
        The constitutional powers of the King are hereditary through the direct, 
       natural and legitimate descent from H.M. Leopold, George, Christian, Freder-
       ick of Saxe-Coburg, from male to male, by order of primogeniture and with 
       the permanent exclusion of women and of their descendants.   
                                             81 
        The prince who marries without the King’s consent or, in his absence, 
       without the consent of those exercising the King’s powers in cases provided 
       for by the Constitution shall be deprived of his right to the crown.   
        Nonetheless, this right may be restored by the King or, in his absence, by 
       those exercising the powers of the King in cases provided for by the Consti-
       tution, but only with the assent of both Houses.   
        
        II. [Repealed]   
        
        III. – Article 125 is valid for events taking place after 8 May 1993.   
        
        IV. [Repealed]   
        
        V. [Repealed]   
        
        VI. – § 1. [Repealed]   
        
        § 2. [Repealed]   
        
        § 3. The personnel and the assets of the province of Brabant will be di-
       vided between the province of Flemish Brabant, the province of Walloon Bra-
       bant, the Brussels-Capital Region, the authorities and the institutions de-
       scribed in Articles 135 and 136, as well as the federal authority, in accordance 
       with the terms determined by a law adopted by a majority as described in 
       Article 4, last paragraph.   
        Following the next renewal of the provincial councils and until they are 
       divided, personnel and assets remaining in common will be jointly managed 
       by the province of Flemish Brabant, the province of Walloon Brabant and by 
       the authorities which are competent in the bilingual region of Brussels-Capi-
       tal.   
        
        § 4. [Repealed]   
        
        § 5. [Repealed]   
       82 
