                                                          
                                   
      A TRUMPET IN THE WADI        
            
      By Sami Michael 
            
      Translated by Yael Lotan 
            
      First published in Hebrew by Am Oved, 1987 
            
      English translation published by Simon & Schuster, 2002 
            
      Study guide by Ilana Kurshan 
                                          
            
            
            
           ABOUT THE BOOK: 
            
           This novel is the story of two Christian Arab sisters who live in the Arab 
           quarter of Haifa with their widowed Christian mother and irascible Egyptian 
           grandfather. Huda, the narrator, falls in love with Alex, the Russian Jewish 
           immigrant who plays his trumpet on the roof of their building. Her younger 
           sister Mary rejects the advances of Zuhair, the son of their difficult Muslim 
           landlord, and chooses instead her uninteresting but dependable cousin 
           Wahid. The story of the two sisters' coming-of-age is narrated against the 
           backdrop of escalating Arab-Israeli tensions in the months leading up to the 
           1982 war between Israel and Lebanon, which ultimately brings Huda's 
           romance to a tragic end. 
                
                
            
           ABOUT THE AUTHOR: 
            
                
           Sami Michael was born in Baghdad, Iraq in 1926. He served as an advocate 
           against the oppressive national regime during World War II, before fleeing to 
           Iran and then to Israel in 1948. Michael studied Arabic Literature and 
           Psychology at Haifa University. For 25 years, he worked as a hydrologist, 
           mainly on the Syrian border, and wrote about his experiences. He published 
           his first novel in 1973. Michael is the author of eight novels. He has received 
           many literary awards, including the WIZO Prize, the ACUM Prize, the Brenner 
           Prize, the Ze`ev Prize for children`s literature, an IBBY Award, the Israel Prize 
           for Literature and the President`s Prize for Lifetime Achievement (2005). The 
           film adaptation of A Trumpet in the Wadi won the 2001 Israel Academy Film 
           Award for Best Drama. For his work for peace, he has been honored by the 
           UN-supported Society for International Development, and the Association for 
           Promotion of Peace in the Middle East (Italy), and has been awarded 
           honorary doctorates by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem (1995), Ben-
           Gurion University of the Negev (2000), Tel Aviv University (2002) for his 
           literary work and contribution to inter-communal reconciliation. He lives in 
           Haifa, Israel.  
            
            
            
                                                              1
           
                                                    
          QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION:  
            
           1.  On the opening page of the novel, Huda declares, "I'm trying to be 
             more Israeli than the Jews themselves" (p. 3). And so she reads Israeli 
             writers and poets, to give just one example. Why does she do this? 
             Does she ultimately succeed in her endeavor to remake herself? 
            
           2.  How does Huda react when Boaz speaks about his son in the army (p. 
             32)? How does this scene cast light on the differences between Huda 
             and her co-workers? 
           
           3.  Huda remarks, "Freedom…is a weighty burden which not everyone can 
             bear, especially not women, most especially not Arab women" (41). 
             Does this quote resonate with Huda and Mary's experiences in this 
             novel? In what way are the sisters free, and it what way are they bound 
             – either by ethnic identity, or by circumstances, or by the men in their 
             lives? Are the male characters generally more free than their female 
             counterparts?  
           
           4.  What happened to Huda's mother's brothers? Where do they live now? 
             How much does she understand about their story? (See, for instance, 
             p. 62-3.) Does the story of her mother's brothers become a part of her 
             identity? How does it affect her conflict about belonging to the larger 
             society? 
           
           5.  How are Muslims distinguished from one another by the characters in 
             this novel? How do the Muslims describe the Jews? And vice versa? 
             Consider, for instance, Abu Nakla's comment on p. 64 that "We 
             Muslims . . . are not like the Jews and the Christians." 
           
           6.  After Alex intercepts Zuhair on the stairwell, Huda remarks, "The Arab 
             street kept silent in defiance and with gritted teeth. Another Jew 
             beating up an Arab. And although I was wholeheartedly on Alex's side . 
             . . I felt the Arab street's pain" (p. 74). What are Huda's conflicted 
             loyalties? Why was this situation so open to misinterpretation?  
           
           7.  Huda's mother and grandfather do not see eye-to-eye when it comes to 
             the significance of ethnic differences. Describe each of their attitudes. 
             Is one more realistic than the other? With which side do you tend to 
             agree? See, for instance, their disagreement on p. 76.  
           
           8.  As an outsider to Jewish life, Huda has her own perspective on Jewish 
             identity. Consider her description of Shirley and Kobi on p. 105. How 
             does she characterize the difference between Ashkenazi and Sephardi 
             Jews (p. 105)? Does this distinction have any significance to you as an 
             American Jew? 
           
           
           
                                                          2
          
                                                    
           
           
            
           9.  Midway through the book, Huda laments that "in a country torn by 
             antagonisms and living in a state of war it isn't possible to cultivate an 
             oasis of love on the border between two nations seeking to strangle 
             each other" (p. 130). And yet she and Alex decide to get married 
             nonetheless. What do you think of their decision? Do you think that 
             Alex and Huda's relationship was doomed from the very beginning? Or 
             was there a chance they could have made a life together?  
           
           10. Huda's mother tells her daughter that Israel is not a good place to bring 
             up children because the country is cursed (p. 131). Do you agree with 
             her comment? What are the unique challenges that Israel poses to 
             parents raising young children? Would you consider raising children 
             there? 
            
           11. What does Wahid mean when he refers to a "good Arab" (p. 182)? 
             Who has the right to confer this designation on someone? Who are the 
             "good Arabs" in this story?  
           
           12. Huda teaches Alex Hebrew and irons his army uniform. Is there irony in 
             these situations? How does Huda explain her actions to herself? 
           
           13. Why does Alex's mother hate Huda so much? What does Huda 
             represent for her? Is her hatred personal, or is it instead about what 
             Huda represents? 
           
           14. Do you think that Huda will raise her child as a Jew or as an Arab? 
             Why?  
           
           
           
          ' 
           
                                                          3
          
                                                            
           REVIEW QUOTES: 
            
            
           Consider these quotes individually. What does each add to your 
           understanding of Michael and his work? Do you agree with the claims they 
           make? 
            
           "This spirited, bittersweet novel captures the Arab-Israeli conflict in 
           microcosm... the novel deals cleverly and humorously with complicated 
           relationships." 
           --Publishers Weekly  
            
           "A Trumpet in the Wadi is a subtle, touching portrait of love and heartache. 
           The layered complications of Arab/Jewish relationships in Israel and the 
           country's myriad social ills are laid bare with humor, poignancy and clarity set 
           amidst the brewing conflict in Lebanon. Sami Michael illuminates the dark 
           places of the heart with his shining prose." 
           --Jon Papernick author of The Ascent of Eli Israel 
            
           "Sami Michael leaps headlong into the magic and tragedy of lives tossed by 
           history and in so doing captures polyglot Haifa in all its unvarnished humanity. 
           The pages all but sing in your hands. You will not forget these characters." 
           --Rachel Kadish, author of Tolstoy Lied 
            
           "The political cannot help but be personal for these unforgettable characters: 
           the result is heartbreaking truth. Sami Michael has written a book which is 
           essential in its beauty and wisdom."  
           --Binnie Kirschenbuam, author of An Almost Perfect Moment 
            
           "Sami Michael has written an inspiring, insightful novel that dismantles long-
           standing clichés about the separation of Arabs and Israelis." 
           --Diana Abu-Jaber, author of Crescent 
            
            
              
           OTHER BOOKS BY SAMI MICHAEL AVAILABLE IN ENGLISH: 
            
           Victoria (Macmillan, 1995)  
           Refuge (Simon & Schuster, 1989) 
                                                             
                                                                   4
           
