
“Get Out of the Building!”

The Startup Owner’s Manual
™
The Step-by-Step Guide for Building a Great Company
by Steve Blank and Bob Dorf
Copyright © 2012 by K and S Ranch Inc., K&S Ranch Publishing Division
The Startup Owner’s Manual™ TM 2012. All Rights Reserved.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold
with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting or other professional services. If legal
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the publisher. For permission to copy of any part of the work, contact: 
info@kandsranch.com
Published by:
K&S Ranch Press, div. K&S Ranch, Inc.
4100 Cabrillo Highway, Pescadero, California 94060
Visit our website at 
www.steveblank.com
.
to contact K&S Ranch, email 
info@kandsranch.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN: 978-0-9849993-7-8
Book design by Karrie Ross, 
www.KarrieRoss.com
First Edition: September 2012
QED stands for Quality, Excellence and Design. The QED seal of approval shown here verifies that this eBook has passed a
rigorous quality assurance process and will render well in most eBook reading platforms.
For more information please 
click here
.
About this Book
Welcome to The Startup Owner’s Manual e-book.
Here you’ll find all the tips, techniques and best practices that entrepreneurs
need in their quest to build successful companies — packaged to suit your
startup team’s particular path. This e-book organizes The Startup Owner’s
Manual into three e-books to better help you navigate the text. In short:
Book 1: The Strategy Guide
 provides background on, and an overview
of the Business Model and Customer Development processes
Book 2: The Web/Mobile
 e-book provides all the step-by-step process
detail you’ll need to create a solid, sustainable startup doing business in
the web/mobile channel, and
Book 3: The Physical Channel
 e-book offers the same for startups
using physical channels
For best results,
 start your reading with the Strategy Guide.
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Guide
 makes up the first third of
the e-book. It provides an overview of why startups are not smaller versions
of large companies; explains how startups search for a business model using
Customer Development; and details the overall customer development
methodology, and key implementation steps.
For companies with virtual distribution channels, 
The Startup Owner’s
Manual for Web/Mobile Channel Startups
, the second part of the e-book,
provides a similar detailed, step-by-step process and approach for startups
that sell via the web or app stores channels, where things move faster,
customers are abundant, and customer attention is always hard to get.
If you’re building a startup with physical distribution channels, you’ll want to
turn to the third part of this e-book, 
The Startup Owner’s Manual for
Physical Channel Startups
. This section provides detailed guidance,
instructions, and examples on how to build a great company, step-by-step.
Included are details on how to get, keep and grow your customer base;
checklists for tracking progress; and tools to help determine just how
successful—or not—you can be.
We believe the Startup Owner’s Manual can help you increase your odds of
finding customers, a market, and product/market fit. Now, as we say, “get of
the building!” And best of luck with your startup.
Steve and Bob
Table of Contents
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Guide
Title Page
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Guide Table of Contents
Preface
Who Is This Book For?
Introduction
     
A Repeatable Path
     
Why a Second Decade?
     
The Four Steps: A New Path
Chapter 1:
The Path to Disaster: A Startup Is Not a Small Version of a Big Company
Chapter 2:
The Path to the Epiphany: The Customer Development Model
Chapter 3:
The Customer Development Manifesto.
Chapter 4:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
Chapter 5:
Introduction to Customer Validation
Chapter 6:
Customer Validation: The Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Guide Index
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Web/Mobile
Channel Startups
Title Page
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Web/Mobile Channel Startups Table
of Contents
How to Read This Book
Getting Started
     
Chapter 1:
The Customer Development Manifesto
STEP ONE: Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 2:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 3:
Customer Discovery, Phase One:
State Your Business Model Hypotheses
     
Chapter 4:
Customer Discovery, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do People Care?”
     
Chapter 5:
Customer Discovery, Phase Three:
“Get Out of the Building” and Test the Product Solution
     
Chapter 6:
Customer Discovery, Phase Four:
Verify the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
STEP TWO: Customer Validation
     
Chapter 7:
Introduction to Customer Validation
     
Chapter 8:
Customer Validation, Phase One:
“Get Ready to Sell”
     
Chapter 9:
Customer Validation, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building and Sell!”
     
Chapter 10:
Customer Validation, Phase Three:
Develop Product and Company Positioning
     
Chapter 11:
Customer Validation, Phase Four:
The Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
How to Build a Web Startup: A Simple Overview
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Web/Mobile Channel Startups Index
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Physical Channel
Startups
Title Page
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Physical Channel Startups Table of
Contents
How to Read This Book
Getting Started
     
Chapter 1:
The Customer Development Manifesto
STEP ONE: Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 2:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 3:
Customer Discovery, Phase One:
State Your Business Model Hypotheses
     
Chapter 4:
Customer Discovery, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do People Care?”
     
Chapter 5:
Customer Discovery, Phase Three:
“Get Out of the Building” and Test the Product Solution
     
Chapter 6:
Customer Discovery, Phase Four:
Verify the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
STEP TWO: Customer Validation
     
Chapter 7:
Introduction to Customer Validation
     
Chapter 8:
Customer Validation, Phase One:
“Get Ready to Sell”
     
Chapter 9:
Customer Validation, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building and Sell!”
     
Chapter 10:
Customer Validation, Phase Three:
Develop Product and Company Positioning
     
Chapter 11:
Customer Validation, Phase Four:
The Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Physical Channel Startups Index

The Startup Owner’s Manual
Strategy Guide
Table of Contents
Preface
Who Is This Book For?
Introduction
     
A Repeatable Path
     
Why a Second Decade?
     
The Four Steps: A New Path
Chapter 1:
The Path to Disaster: A Startup Is Not a Small Version of a Big Company
Chapter 2:
The Path to the Epiphany: The Customer Development Model
Chapter 3:
The Customer Development Manifesto.
Chapter 4:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
Chapter 5:
Introduction to Customer Validation
Chapter 6:
Customer Validation: The Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Guide Index
Preface
I
N
 1602, 
THE
 D
UTCH
 E
AST
 I
NDIA
 C
OMPANY,
 generally regarded as the first
“modern company,” issued the first stock certificates. In the intervening 300
years, companies managed to start, build and grow without formally trained
executives. By the 20
th
 century, the complexity of modern corporations
demanded a cadre of executives trained to administer large companies. In
1908, Harvard awarded the first master of business administration (MBA)
degree to fill the need to bring professional education standards to big
business. The MBA curriculum standardized and codified the essential
elements an operating executive in a modern company needed to know: cost
accounting, strategy, finance, product management, engineering, personnel
management and operations.
Formal management tools are about 100 years old.
 
Fast-forward to the mid-20
th
 century. The pairing of venture capital and
startup entrepreneurship emerged in its modern form, and the startup industry
they fostered has been exploding ever since. Yet for the past 50 years, finding
the successful formula for repeatable startup success has remained a black art.
Founders have continually struggled with and adapted the “big business”
tools, rules and processes taught in business schools and suggested by their
investors. Investors have been shocked when startups failed to execute “the
plan,” never admitting to the entrepreneurs that 
no startup executes to its
business plan.
 Today, after half a century 
of practice, we know unequivocally
that the traditional MBA curriculum for running large companies like IBM,
GM and Boeing 
does not
 work in startups. In fact, it’s toxic.
With the benefit of hindsight, entrepreneurs now understand the
problem, namely that 
startups are not simply smaller versions of large
companies
. Companies execute business models where customers, their
problems, and necessary product features are all “knowns.” In sharp contrast,
startups operate in “search” mode, seeking a repeatable and profitable
business model. The search for a business model requires dramatically
different rules, roadmaps, skill sets, and tools in order to minimize risk and
optimize chances for success.
By the beginning of the 21
st
 century, entrepreneurs, led by web and
mobile startups, began to seek and develop their own management tools.
Now, a decade later, a radically different set of startup tools has emerged,
distinct from those used in large companies but as comprehensive as the
traditional “MBA Handbook.” The result is the emerging “science of
entrepreneurial management.” My first book, 
The Four Steps to the
Epiphany,
 was one of its first texts. It recognized that the classic books about
large-company management were ill-suited for early-stage ventures. It
offered a reexamination of the existing product-introduction process and
delineated a radically different method that brings customers and their needs
headfirst into the process long before the launch.
We are building the first management tools
specifically for startups.
 
At the time I wrote it, the book was my proposed methodology for
getting startups right. But just as it was published, agile engineering became
the preferred product-development method. This iterative and incremental
method created a need and a demand for a parallel process to provide rapid
and continual customer feedback. The 
Customer Development process
 I
articulated in 
The Four Steps
 fit that need perfectly.
Over the past decade, thousands of scientists, engineers and MBAs in
my classes at Stanford’s engineering school
 and U.C. Berkeley’s Haas
School of Business—plus those sponsored by the 
National Science
Foundation
—have discussed, deployed, assessed and enhanced the Customer
Development process. It has since been implemented by tens of thousands of
entrepreneurs, engineers, and investors worldwide.
While the fundamental, powerful “Four Steps” remain at its core, this
book is far more than a second edition. Nearly every step in the process, and
in fact the entire approach, have been enhanced and refined based on a
decade of Customer Development experience.
Customer development is paired with agile product
development.
 
Even more gratifying: now, a decade later, multiple books and authors,
are filling shelves in the newly created section for the strategy and science of
entrepreneurship. Some of the other areas in this emerging field of
entrepreneurial management are:
agile development, an incremental and interactive approach to
engineering that enables product or service development to iterate and
pivot to customer and market feedback
business model design, which replaces static business plans with a nine-
box map of the key elements that make up a company
creativity and innovation tools for creating and fostering winning ideas
the Lean Startup, an intersection of customer and agile development
lean user interface design to improve web/mobile interfaces and
conversion rates
venture and entrepreneurial finance, to attract and manage funds that
fuel the innovation
No one book, including this one, offers a complete roadmap or all the
answers for entrepreneurs. Yet together, the texts in the entrepreneurial
management science library offer entrepreneurs guidance where none existed
before. Startups, driven by potential markets measured in billions of people,
will use this body of knowledge to test, refine and scale their ideas far faster
and more affordably than ever.
No one book, including this one, offers a complete
roadmap...
 
My co-author Bob and I hope books like this one help speed the startup
revolution and enhance its success—and yours.
Steve Blank
Pescadero, Calif., March 2012
Who Is This Book For?
T
HIS BOOK IS FOR ALL ENTREPRENEURS
 and uses the term 
startup
 literally
hundreds of times. But what exactly is a startup? 
A startup is not a smaller
version of a large company.
 A startup is a temporary organization 
in search
of a scalable, repeatable, profitable business model
. At the outset, the startup
business model is a canvas covered with ideas and guesses, but it has no
customers and minimal customer knowledge.
But we’ve only defined the words 
startup, entrepreneur
, and 
innovation
halfway. These words mean different things in Silicon Valley, on Main
Street, and in Corporate America. While each type of startup is distinct, this
book offers guidance for each one.
A startup is a temporary organization in search of a
scalable, repeatable, profitable business model.
 
Small Business Entrepreneurship:
 In the United States, the majority of
entrepreneurs and startups are found among 5.9 million small businesses that
make up 99.7 percent of all U.S. companies and employ 50 percent of all
nongovernment workers. These are often service-oriented businesses like
drycleaners, gas stations and convenience stores, where entrepreneurs define
success as paying the owners well and making a profit, and they seldom
aspire to take over an industry or build a $100 million business.
Scalable startups
 are the work of traditional technology entrepreneurs.
These entrepreneurs start a company believing their vision will change the
world and result in a company with hundreds of millions if not billions of
dollars in sales. The early days of a scalable startup are about the search for a
repeatable and scalable business model. Scale requires external venture-
capital investment in the tens of millions to fuel rapid expansion. Scalable
startups tend to cluster in technology centers such as Silicon Valley,
Shanghai, New York, Bangalore, and Israel and make up a small percentage
of entrepreneurs, but their outsize return potential attracts almost all the risk
capital (and press).
Scalable Startup
 (Figure i.1)
“Buyable” startups
 are a new phenomenon. With the extremely low cost of
developing web/mobile apps, startups can literally fund themselves on
founders’ credit cards and raise small amounts of risk capital, usually less
than $1 million. These startups (and their investors) are happy to be acquired
for $5 million to $50 million, purchased by larger companies often to acquire
the talent as much as the business itself.
Large Company Entrepreneurship:
 Large companies have finite life
cycles. Most grow by offering new products that are variants of their core
products (an approach known as 
sustaining innovation).
 They may also turn
to 
disruptive innovation,
 attempting to introduce new products into new
markets with new 
customers. Ironically, large companies’ size and culture
make disruptive innovation (really an effort to launch a scalable startup inside
a big company) extremely difficult to execute.
...large companies’ size and culture make disruptive
innovation extremely difficult.

 
Social entrepreneurs
 build innovative nonprofits to change the world.
Customer Development provides them a scorecard for assessing scalability,
asset leverage, return on investment and growth metrics. These
entrepreneurial ventures seek solutions rather than profits and happen on
every continent in areas as diverse as water, agriculture, health, and
microfinance.
While the Customer Development process helps scalable startups the
most, each of these five startup types has entrepreneurship and innovation at
its heart. And each improves its chances for finding the right path to success
through the use of Customer Development.
Who Is This Book 
Not
 For?
There are cases where using the Customer Development methodology and
this book is inappropriate.
Early-stage ventures fall into two types: those 
with customer/market risk
and those with 
invention risk.
Markets with invention risk are those where it’s questionable whether
the technology can ever be made to work, but if it does, customers will
beat a path to the company’s door. (Think life sciences and cure for
cancer.)
Markets with customer/market risk are those where the unknown is
whether customers will adopt the product.
For companies building web-based products, 
product
 development may
be difficult, but with enough time and iteration, Engineering will eventually
converge on a solution and ship a functional product—
it’s engineering, not
invention.
 The real risk is in whether there is a customer and a market for the
product as spec’ed. In these markets 
it’s all about customer/market risk.
There’s a whole other set of markets where the risk is truly 
invention.
These are markets where it may take five or even 10 years to get a product
out of the lab and into production (e.g., biotech). Whether it will eventually
work, no one knows, but the payoff can be so large that investors will take
the risk. In these markets 
it’s all about invention risk.

Startups solve customer and market risk by reading
this book.
 
A third type of market has 
both invention and market risk.
 For example,
complex new semiconductor architectures mean you may not know if the
chip performs as well as you thought until you get first silicon. But then,
because there might be entrenched competitors and your concept is radically
new, you still need to invest in the Customer Development process to learn
how to get design wins from companies that may be happy with their existing
vendors.
Startups solve invention risk by using simulation tools (computational
fluid dynamics, finite element analysis, etc.). Startups solve customer and
market risk by reading this book. When the issues are customer acceptance
and market adoption, this book shows the path.
Introduction
A legendary hero is usually the founder of something—the founder of a
new age, the founder of a new religion, the founder of a new city, the
founder of a new way of life. In order to found something new, one has
to leave the old and go on a quest of the seed idea, a germinal idea that
will have the potential of bringing forth that new thing.
— Joseph Campbell, 
The Hero with a Thousand Faces
J
OSEPH
 C
AMPBELL POPULARIZED THE NOTION
 of an archetypal “hero’s
journey,” a pattern that recurs in the mythologies and religions of cultures
around the world. From Moses and the burning bush to Luke Skywalker’s
meeting Obi-wan Kenobi, the journey always begins with a hero who hears a
calling to a quest. At the outset of the voyage, the path is unclear and no end
is in sight. Each hero meets a unique set of obstacles, but Campbell’s keen
insight was that the outline of these stories is always the same. There are not
a thousand different heroes but 
one hero with a thousand faces
.
The hero’s journey is an apt way to think of startups. All new companies
and new products begin with a vision—a hope for what could be and a goal
few others can see. It’s this bright and burning founder’s vision that
differentiates an entrepreneur from a big-company CEO and separates
startups from existing businesses.
Founding entrepreneurs are out to make their vision and business real.
To succeed, they must abandon the status quo, recruit a team that shares their
vision, and strike out together on what appears to be a new path, often
shrouded in uncertainty, fear and doubt. Obstacles, hardships and potential
disaster lie ahead, and their journey to success tests more than financial
resources—it tests their stamina, agility, and courage.
Take a new path, often shrouded in uncertainty,
fear, and doubt.

 
Every entrepreneur is certain his or her journey is unique. Each travels
down the startup path without a roadmap and believes that no model or
template could possibly apply. What makes some startups successful while
others sell off the furniture often seems like luck. But it isn’t. As Campbell
suggests, 
the outline is always the same
. The path to startup success is well-
traveled and well-understood. There is a true and repeatable path to success.
This book charts that path.
A Repeatable Path
In the last quarter of the 20
th
 century, startups thought they knew the correct
path for the startup journey. They adopted a methodology for product
development, launch, and life-cycle management almost identical to the
processes taught in business schools for use in large companies. These
processes provide detailed business plans, checkpoints and goals for every
step toward getting a product out the door—sizing markets, estimating sales,
developing marketing-requirements documents, prioritizing product features.
Yet at the end of the day, even with all these processes, the embarrassing fact
is that in companies large and small, established corporate giants as well as
new startups, more than nine of 10 new products fail. It’s true in every
product category—high-tech or low, online or off, consumer or business—
well-funded or not.
Even after decades of similar failures, investors are always surprised
when a new venture fails to execute its business “plan.” 
And still they
continue to rely on the same product-introduction processes
.
We now know what the problem is. Startups have been using tools
appropriate for executing a known business. 
But startups are all about
unknowns
. To find the path to build a winning startup, entrepreneurs must try
a new way:
Winners
 throw out the traditional product management and introduction
processes they learned at existing companies. Instead, they combine agile
engineering and Customer Development to iteratively build, test and search
for a business model, turning unknowns into knowns.
Winners also recognize their startup “vision” as a series of untested
hypotheses in need of “customer proof.” They relentlessly test for insights,
and they course-correct in days or weeks, not months or years, to preserve
cash and eliminate time wasted on building features and products that
customers don’t want.
Winners recognize their startup is a series of
untested hypotheses.
 
Losers
 blindly execute a rigid product management and introduction
methodology. They assume that the founder’s vision drives the business
strategy and product development plans and that all they need to do is to raise
funds for execution.
Founders, not employees, must search for a business model. The best
way to search is for the 
founders themselves
 to 
get out of the building
 to gain
a deep, personal, firsthand understanding of their potential customers’ needs
before
 locking into a specific path and precise product specs. That’s the
difference between winners and losers. It’s also the Customer Development
process detailed in this book.
Why a Second Decade?
Startups have now been using Customer Development for a decade, since the
initial publication of 
The Four Steps to the Epiphany
. If this is your first
contact with the 
Four Steps,
 welcome aboard. For the tens of thousands
who’ve embraced that first version, 
The Startup Owner’s Manual
 offers a
great deal more. The first version assumed startups were high-tech ventures
in Silicon Valley selling products through a physical sales channel and
aiming to be billion-dollar businesses. A lot has happened in 10 years, and
this version embraces those changes. For example:
Bits: 
The Second Industrial Revolution
For thousands of years after the invention of the wheel, a 
product
 was a
physical object one could touch, such as food, cars, planes, books, and
household goods. These physical products reached customers via a physical
sales 
channel:
 salespeople visiting customers, or customers visiting stores.
Figure i.2
 shows this intersection of 
physical products sold through a
physical channel.
Physical Products Sold Through a Physical Channel
 (Figure i.2)
One of the breakthroughs in commerce was the invention of products
that were 
ideas or promises that didn’t exist in physical form
, such as life and
health insurance, stocks and bonds, and commodity futures.
In the 1970s, software began to be sold as a product unbundled from any
particular computer. The ability to purchase 
bits
 was a new concept. By
themselves the bits were useless, but when combined with a computer in the
form of software applications, bits solved problems or amused people (word
processing, balancing checkbooks, game play). These software applications
and entertainment, all in the form of bits, were sold to consumers through
specialized retail computer stores, a physical channel.
Software Products Sold Through Physical Channels
 (Figure i.3)
Still other software applications were designed to solve problems
companies had (database access, manufacturing automation, sales
automation), and added the upper right box to 
Figure i.3
, Software Products
Sold Through Physical Channels.
As the Internet created a new form of sales channel, a new class of
company emerged with the value proposition to sell physical products over
the Internet. Amazon, Zappos, Dell, and a whole raft of other e-commerce
companies filled a new niche: 
physical products sold via a web channel
. This
new sales channel created 
massive disruption in the existing world of
physical distribution, as book and music retailers perhaps know best of all.
Physical Products in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure i.4)
Over the past decade a new class of product has emerged, where 
BOTH
the product and the channel are bits
 (see 
Figure i.5
). Startups can now be
built for thousands rather than millions of dollars and in weeks rather than
years. As a result, the number of startups founded each year has exploded.
New applications such as social networks that duplicate the socialization we
once had face-to-face are being mediated via machine. Search engines that
scour the web, such as Google and Bing, exist only in bits, in a web/mobile
channel.
More important, entire industries that started by selling physical
products in physical locations have begun their migration to bits sold over the
Internet. Originally, people sold books, music, videos, movies, travel, and
stocks and bonds either face-to-face or in storefronts. Those channels are
either radically transformed or disappearing as physical products turn into
bits.
Software Products In Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure i.5)
Speed, Time and Iterations: the “Second Industrial
Revolution”
Regardless of the business, any enterprise focused on the bottom righthand
box in 
Figure i.2
—Physical Goods Sold through a Physical Channel—has
discovered over the past decade that the old rules and tools for physical
businesses and channels no longer apply. They’ve learned that the closer a
company gets to a web/mobile channel and a web/mobile product, the faster
it can change, test and optimize both 
product and offer
. They need a new
process to quickly adapt to the new freedoms a web/mobile channel and
product allow, and they’ve found it in Customer Development.
The Customer Development process gathers customer feedback about
product, channel, price, and positioning, all of which can be modified and
tested in near-real time, and uses it as immediate feedback to iterate and
optimize. As a result, web/mobile channel startups can move forward at
“Internet speed,” an impossibility with physical distribution channels and
products.
A mere decade ago, getting feedback on the features of a video game
required recruiting focus groups to come in and play the game while being
observed through one-way mirrors. Today, companies like Zynga test and
tune the features of their 
online games in days. Are sales slow because the
game is too hard? You can adjust the scoring or other game variables and
change the product itself quicker than you can say touchdown.
Customer Development is the process to organize
the search for the business model.
 
Theoretically, when startups’ products and channels are bits, they can
gather and act on information 100 times faster than companies delivering
physical goods via physical sales channels (10 times the number of iterative
learning cycles, each using only 10 percent of the cash.) In fact, companies
like Facebook, Google, Groupon, and Zynga grew faster in a decade than
most industrial corporations grew in the 20
th
 century. That’s why we call it
the Second Industrial Revolution.
The Four Steps: A New Path
The core of Customer Development is blissfully simple: Products developed
by founders who get out in front of customers early and often, win. Products
handed off to sales and marketing organizations that are only tangentially
involved in the new-product development process will lose. There are no
facts inside your building, 
so get the heck outside
. Getting out of the building
means acquiring a deep understanding of customer needs and combining that
knowledge with incremental and iterative product development. The mix of
Customer Development and Agile engineering dramatically increases the
odds of new product and company success, while reducing the need for
upfront cash and eliminating wasted time, energy, money and effort.
There are no facts inside your building, 
so get the
heck outside.
 
Customer Development recognizes the startup’s mission as a relentless
search to refine its vision and idea, and to make changes in every aspect of
the business invalidated during the search process. An entrepreneur seeks to
test a series of unproven hypotheses (guesses) about a startup’s business
model: who the customers are, what the product features should be, and how
this scales into a hugely successful company. Customer Development
recognizes a startup is 
a temporary organization
 built to search for the
answers to what makes a repeatable and scalable business model. Customer
Development is 
the process to organize that search
.
CHAPTER 1
The Path to Disaster: A Startup Is Not a
Small Version of a Big Company
The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over and
expecting different results.
—Albert Einstein
W
HILE THIS STORY IS OLD, ITS LESSONS
 are timeless. In the heyday of the dot-
com bubble at the end of the 20
th
 century, 
Webvan
 stood out as one of the
most electrifying new startups, with an idea that would potentially touch
every household in America. Raising one of the largest financial war chests
ever seen (more than $800 million), the company aimed to revolutionize the
$450 billion retail grocery business with online ordering and same-day door-
to-door grocery delivery. Webvan believed this was one of the first “killer
applications” for the Internet. Customers could just point, click, and order.
Webvan’s CEO told 
Forbes
 magazine that Webvan would “set the rules for
the largest consumer sector in the economy.”
Beyond amassing megabucks, the Webvan entrepreneurs seemed to do
everything right. Backed by experienced venture-capital investors, the
company raced to build vast automated warehouses and bought fleets of
delivery trucks while building an easy-to-use website. Webvan hired a
seasoned CEO from the consulting industry. What’s more, most initial
customers actually liked the service. But barely 24 months after the initial
public offering, Webvan was bankrupt and out of business. What happened?
...barely 24 months after the initial public offering,
Webvan was bankrupt.

 
This was not a failure of execution. Webvan did everything its board and
investors asked. In particular, the company fervently followed the traditional
new-product introduction model commonly used by most new ventures and
embraced the mantras of the time: “first mover advantage” and “get big fast.”
Webvan’s failure to ask “where are the customers?” illuminates how this
tried-and-true model led one of the best-funded startups of all time down the
path to disaster.
The Traditional New-Product Introduction Model
In the 20th century, every company bringing a new product to market used
some form of product management model (
Figure 1.1
). Emerging early in the
century, this product-centric model described a process that evolved in
manufacturing industries. The consumer packaged-goods industry adopted it
in the 1950s, and it spread to the technology business in the last quarter of the
century. There it became an integral part of the startup culture.
At first glance, the new-product introduction model outlined in the
diagram at right appears to be helpful and benign. It illustrates the process of
getting a new 
product into the hands of waiting customers. A new product
moves from development to customer testing (alpha/beta test), and using
feedback from this initial testing, the product engineers fix technical errors in
the product until the product launch date and first customer ship.
The new-product introduction model is a good fit for an existing
company where the customers are known, the product features can be spec’ed
upfront, the market is well-defined, and the basis of competition is
understood.

New Product Introduction Diagram
 (Figure 1.1)
As for startups, a scant few fit these criteria. Few even know who their
customers are. Yet many persist in using the new-product introduction model
not only to manage product development but as a roadmap for finding
customers and setting the timing for the startup’s sales, launch and revenue
plans. Investors use the new-product introduction diagram to set and plan
funding. All parties involved in the startup use a roadmap leading toward a
very different location, yet they’re surprised to end up lost.
What’s wrong with the old model, and how did it contribute to the
billion-dollar Webvan implosion?
Concept and Seed Stage
At the concept and seed stage, founders capture their passion and vision for
the company, sometimes on the back of a napkin, and turn them into a set of
key ideas, which becomes the outline for the 
business plan
.
Next, issues surrounding the product are defined. What is the product or
service concept? What are the product features and benefits? Can it be built?
Is further technical research needed? Who will the customers be, and where
will they 
be found? Statistical and market research and a few customer
interviews fuel the evaluation and business plan.
This step also brings forth a first guess at how the product will
ultimately reach the customer, including discussions of competitive
differences, distribution channels, and costs. An initial positioning chart
explains the company and its benefits to venture capitalists or corporate
higher-ups. The business plan now gets market-size, competitive and
financial sections, with an appendix containing Excel spreadsheets
forecasting revenue and expenses. Creative writing, passion and shoe leather
combine in the concept and seed phase in hopes of convincing an investor to
fund the company or the new division.
Once a waterfall process starts, the proverbial train
has left the station...
 
Webvan did all of this extremely well. Founded in December 1996, with
a compelling story and a founder with a track record, Webvan raised $10
million from leading Silicon Valley venture capitalists in 1997. In the next
two years, additional private rounds totaling an unbelievable $393 million
followed before the company’s IPO.
Product Development
In stage two, product development, everyone stops talking and starts
working. The respective departments go to their figurative corners as the
company begins to specialize by function. Marketing refines the size of the
market defined in the business plan and begins to target the first customers.
In a well-organized startup (one with a fondness for process), the marketing
folk might even run a focus group or two on the market they think they’re in
and work with Product Management on a market requirements document
(MRD) for engineering to specify the product’s final features and functions.
Marketing starts to build a sales demo, writes sales 
materials (websites,
presentations, data sheets), and hires a pr agency. In this stage, or by alpha
test, the company traditionally hires a VP of Sales.
Meanwhile, Engineering focuses on specifying and then building the
product. The simple box labeled “Product Development” typically expands
into a “waterfall” or “spiral” or incremental process of interlacing steps, all
focused on minimizing development risk of a defined feature set (
Figure 1.2
).
This process starts with the founder’s vision, which may be expanded into an
MRD (and a product requirements document), and expands further into
detailed engineering specifications. With those in hand, Engineering begins
implementation fueled by cold pizza and long nights and weekends. Once a
waterfall process starts, the proverbial train has left the station and the
product is nearly impossible to revise. As a rule, the “train” can run almost
nonstop for 18 or perhaps 24 months or more, uninterrupted by changes or
new ideas no matter how good they might be for the business.
The Product Development “Waterfall” Model
 (Figure 1.2)
In Webvan’s case, Engineering moved along two fronts: building the
automated warehouses and designing the website. The automated warehouses
were a technological marvel, with automated conveyors and carousels
transporting food items off the shelves to workers who packed them for
delivery. Webvan also designed its own inventory, warehouse, and route
management systems and software to manage the entire customer order and
delivery process. This software communicated with the Webvan website and
issued order-fulfillment instructions to the distribution center. Once a
delivery was scheduled, the system’s custom route-planning feature
determined the most efficient route for delivering the goods to customers’
homes.
At the same time, planning began for a marketing and promotion
program designed to strengthen the Webvan brand name, get customers to try
the service in 
the first target market, build strong customer loyalty, and
maximize repeat usage and purchases. The plan was to build Webvan’s brand
name (down to stickering every cup holder in San Francisco’s AT&T Park)
and customer loyalty through public relations programs, advertising
campaigns and promotional activities. Spending for all these activities was
part of the business plan.
Alpha/Beta Test
In stage three, the alpha/beta test, Engineering continues building along the
classic waterfall development model, working toward the first customer ship
date. And, by beta test time, working with a small group of outside users to
test the product and ensure that it works as specified. Marketing develops a
complete marketing communications plan, sets up the corporate website,
provides Sales with a full complement of support materials, and starts the
public relations bandwagon rolling. The pr agency polishes the positioning
and starts contacting the long-lead-time press and blogs, while Marketing
starts the branding activities.
Sales signs up the first beta customers (who may volunteer to pay for the
privilege of testing a new product), begins to build the selected distribution
channel, and staffs and scales the sales organization outside headquarters.
The sales VP works toward achieving the revenue plan as specified in the
business plan. Investors and board members start measuring progress by the
number of orders in place by first customer ship. The CEO hits the streets and
the phone or the parent-company headquarters, searching for additional
capital.
Webvan began to beta-test its grocery delivery service in May 1999 with
about 1,100 customers. At the same time, the marketing buzz started with a
pr blitz with hundreds of articles touting the newest entrant in the online
grocery business. Private investors poured hundreds of millions of dollars
into the company.
Product Launch and First Customer Ship
With the product working (sort of), the company goes into “big-bang”
spending mode. The product and the company are launched. The company
has a large press event, and Marketing launches a series of programs to create
end-user demand. In anticipation of sales, the company hires a national sales
organization; the sales channel has quotas and sales goals. The board begins
measuring company performance based on sales execution against its
business plan, albeit one typically written at least a year earlier, when the
company first sought investment.
Building a sales channel and supporting marketing burn a lot of cash.
Assuming no early liquidity event for the company, more fund-raising is
often required. The CEO looks at the product-launch activities and the scale-
up of the sales and marketing team and goes out yet again, palm up, to the
investor community. (In the dot-com bubble economy, investors used an IPO
at product launch to take the money and run, before there was a track record
of success or failure.) This operational model no doubt sounds familiar to
many: a product- and process-centric model used by countless startups to take
their first products to market.
Webvan launched its first regional web store in June 1999 (just a month
after starting beta test) and filed for its public offering 60 days later. The
company raised $400 million and had a market capitalization of $8.5 billion
the day of its IPO—larger than the market cap of the top three grocery chains
combined. The elation was short-lived.
The 9 Deadly Sins of the New Product
Introduction Model
For new products like Webvan, the business plan fails as a roadmap
because both the product and the customer are unknown. For most startups,
these nine flawed assumptions are the most toxic of all:
1. Assuming “I Know What the Customer Wants”
First is the founder’s unwavering belief that he or she understands who the
customers will be, what they need, and how to sell it to them. Any
dispassionate observer would recognize that on Day One, a startup has no
customers, and unless the founder is a true domain expert, he or she can only
guess about the customer, problem, and business model. On Day One, a
startup is a 
faith-based
 initiative built on guesses. Yet the traditional product
introduction methodology has founders take these many business model
guesses as facts and go design a product and start spending money to build it
on a race to “first customer ship”—all before talking to a single customer.
On Day One, a startup is a 
faith-based
 initiative...
 
To succeed, founders need to turn hypotheses or guesses into facts as
soon as possible by getting out of the building, asking customers if the
hypotheses were correct, and quickly changing those that were wrong.
2. The “I Know What Features to Build” Flaw
The second flawed assumption is implicitly driven by the first. Founders,
presuming they know their customers, assume they know all the features
customers need. These founders specify, design, and build a fully featured
product using classic 
product development methods without ever leaving
their building. But wait—isn’t that what startups 
should
 do? No—that’s what
companies with existing customers do.
...it’s unknown whether the features appeal to
customers.
 
The 
waterfall development process
 proceeds sequentially and without
interruption for as long as a year or two. Progress is measured by each new
line of code written or new piece of hardware built throughout the process
until the product is released. Yet without direct and continuous customer
contact, 
it’s unknown whether the features appeal to customers
. Fixing the
inevitable product mistakes after building and shipping the entire product is
costly and time-consuming, if not deadly. It can render the product obsolete
by launch. Worse, it often causes huge engineering waste, with hundreds of
hours of work tossed aside, or tons of code cut and dropped to the floor, when
customers say the new features aren’t ones they care about. Ironically,
startups were often crippled by the very methodology they traditionally used
to build new products.
3. Focus on Launch Date
The traditional product introduction model focuses engineering, sales and
marketing on the all-important, immovable launch date. Marketing tries to
pick an “event” (trade show, conference, blog, etc.) where they can “launch”
the product. Executives look at that date and the calendar, working backward
to ignite fireworks on the day the product is launched. Neither management
nor investors tolerate “wrong turns” that result in delays. In fact, traditional
engineering schedules have test cycles with the names 
alpha, beta
, and
release
 but rarely allow time to improve the product. They’re still geared to
putting out the original product with minimal bugs, though.
The product launch and first customer ship dates are merely the dates
when a product development team thinks the product’s first release is
“finished.” It doesn’t 
mean the company understands its customers or how to
market or sell to them, yet in almost every startup, ready or not, departmental
clocks are set irrevocably to “first customer ship.” Even worse, a startup’s
investors are managing their financial expectations by this date as well.
The chorus of investor voices says, “Why, of course that’s what you do.
Getting the product to market is what sales and marketing people do in
startups. That’s how a startup makes money.” This is deadly advice. Ignore it.
Focusing only on launch results in a “fire, ready, aim” strategy that ignores
the customer discovery process—a fundamental and generally fatal error.
Obviously, every startup or company wants to get a product to market and
sell it, but that can’t be done until the company understands 
who
 it’s selling
to and 
why
 they’ll buy. The forced march ignores the iterative loop that says,
“If our assumptions are wrong, maybe we need to try something different.” It
shuts off the “build, test and learn” flow and assumes that customers will
come based merely on good engineering execution.
Time after time, only after launch does a startup discover that not
enough customers visit its website, play the game, bring their friends, or
convert to orders. Or it discovers that early customers don’t scale into a
mainstream market, or the product doesn’t solve a high-value problem, or the
cost of distribution is too high. While those discoveries are bad enough, the
startup is now burdened with an expensive, scaled-up sales and marketing
organization—effective only at burning mountains of cash—that’s now
trying to figure out what went wrong and how to fix it.
At Webvan, the dot-com mania may have intensified the company’s
drive to launch, but its single-minded focus was typical of most startups. At
first customer ship, Webvan had close to 400 employees. It hired more than
500 more during the next six months. By May 1999, the company had opened
its first $40 million distribution center, built and scaled for a customer base it
could only guess at, and it had committed to 15 other distribution centers of
the same size. Why? Because the Webvan business plan said to do so,
regardless of whether the customers agreed.
4. Emphasis on Execution Instead of Hypotheses,
Testing, Learning, and Iteration
Startup cultures emphasize “get it done, and get it done fast.” So it’s natural
that heads of engineering, sales and marketing all believe they are hired for
what they know how to do, not what they can learn
. They assume that their
experience is relevant to this new venture and that all they need do is put that
knowledge to work managing the execution that’s worked for them before.
While established companies 
execute
 business models where customers,
problems, and necessary product features are all knowns, startups need to
operate in a “
search
” mode as they test and prove every one of their initial
hypotheses. They learn from the results of each test, refine the hypothesis and
test again, all in search of a repeatable, scalable and profitable business
model.
Relentless execution without knowing what to
execute is a crime.
 
In practice, startups begin with a set of initial hypotheses (guesses), most
of which will end up being wrong. Therefore, focusing on execution and
delivering a product or service based on those initial, untested hypotheses is a
going-out-of-business strategy.
In contrast, the traditional product introduction model assumes that
building a startup is a step-by-step, sequential, execution-oriented process.
Each step unfolds in a logical progression that can be captured in a PERT
chart (a project management technique that maps the steps and time required
for project completion), with milestones and resources assigned for the
completion of each step. But anyone who has ever taken a new product out to
a set of potential customers knows that a good day in front of customers is
two steps forward and one step back. The ability to learn from these missteps
distinguishes a successful startup from those that have vanished.
Like all startups focused on executing to a sequential product
introduction plan, Webvan hired vice presidents of merchandising, marketing
and product management—all oriented around executing a given sales and
marketing strategy instead of listening to customers and discovering customer
needs. Sixty days after first customer ship, those three VPs employed more
than 50 people.
The ability to learn from missteps distinguishes a
successful startup.
 
5. Traditional Business Plans Presume No Trial and
No Errors
The one great advantage of the traditional product development model: it
provides boards and founders an unambiguous path with clearly defined
milestones the board 
presumes
 will be achieved. Most engineers know what
alpha test, beta test
, and 
first customer ship
 mean. If the product fails to
work, everyone stops to fix it. In stark contrast, before first customer ship,
sales and marketing activities are ad hoc and fuzzy, and seldom have
measurable, concrete objectives. They lack any way to stop and fix what’s
broken (and don’t even know 
if
 it’s broken or 
how
 to stop).
Financial progress is tracked using metrics like income statement,
balance sheet and cash flow even when there’s no revenue to measure. In
reality, none of these are useful for startups. Board directors have simply
adopted the traditional metrics used in large companies with existing
customers and known business models. In a startup, these metrics don’t track
progress against the startup’s only goal: 
to find a repeatable and scalable
business model.
 Instead, traditional metrics get in the way.
Instead of asking, “How many days to the beta test?” or, “What’s in our
sales pipeline?” a startup’s board and management team need to ask specific
questions about results of its long list of tests and experiments to validate all
components of its business model.
If a startup’s board of directors isn’t asking these kinds of questions, it’s
wasting time without adding value. No matter what, directors and founders
must stay focused on one financial metric that always matters: cash burn rate
and number of months’ worth of cash left in the bank.
If a startup’s board of directors isn’t asking these
kinds of questions, it’s wasting time...
 
Webvan had no milestones saying, “Stop and evaluate the launch
results.” Otherwise, it might have noticed the stark contrast between the
2,000 daily orders it was getting and the 8,000 in the business-plan forecast.
Before any meaningful customer feedback was in hand and only a month
after shipping began, Webvan signed a $1 billion deal (yes, $1,000,000,000)
with Bechtel to build 26 additional distribution centers over the next three
years.
6. Confusing Traditional Job Titles with What a
Startup Needs to Accomplish
Most startups have simply borrowed job titles from established companies.
But remember, these are jobs in an organization that’s executing a 
known
business model. The title 
Sales
 in an existing company reflects a team
repeatedly selling a known product to a well-understood group of customers
with standard presentations, prices, terms, and conditions. Startups by
definition have few if any of these known elements. In fact, they’re out
searching for them!
Because target customers, product specs and product presentations may
change daily, early-stage startup executives need dramatically different skills
from executives who are working in an established company selling
established products or line extensions. The demands of customer discovery
require people who are comfortable with change, chaos, and learning from
failure and are at ease working in risky, unstable situations without a
roadmap. In short, startups should welcome the rare 
breed generally known
as entrepreneurs. They’re open to learning and discovery—highly curious,
inquisitive, and creative. They must be eager to 
search
 for a repeatable and
scalable business model. Agile enough to deal with daily change and
operating “without a map.” Readily able to wear multiple hats, often on the
same day, and comfortable celebrating failure when it leads to learning and
iteration.
Webvan’s CEO and VPs all came from large-company backgrounds and
experience. They were surprised and uncomfortable with the chaos of a
startup and tried to solve the problem by scaling the company rapidly.
...measuring progress against a product launch or
revenue plan is simply false progress.
 
7. Sales and Marketing Execute to a Plan
Hiring VPs and execs with the right titles but the wrong skills leads to further
startup trouble as high-powered sales and marketing people arrive on the
payroll to execute the “plan.” Here’s how it typically unfolds:
Following the business plan and the traditional product introduction
model, the board and founders agree to a launch date, a burn rate, a revenue
plan and a set of milestones. The sales VP begins to hire the core sales team,
design sales pitches, and make appointments and attempts to acquire early
“lighthouse” customers (prominent customers who will attract others). At the
same time, the sales team uses revenue goals specified in the business plan to
track its progress in understanding customers. Meanwhile, the marketing VP
is busy designing websites, logos, presentations, data sheets and collateral,
and hiring pr agencies to create buzz. These tactics become marketing
objectives, 
even though they’re merely tactics
. Marketing discovers whether
its positioning, messaging, pricing and demand-creation activities will work
only after first customer ship
.
Executives and board members accustomed to measurable signs of
progress against “the plan” will focus on these execution activities because
this is what they 
know how to do (and what they believe they were hired to
do). Of course, in established companies with known customers and markets,
this focus makes sense. And even in some startups in “existing markets,”
where customers and markets are known, it might work. But in a majority of
startups, measuring progress against a product launch or revenue plan is
simply false progress, since it transpires in a vacuum absent real customer
feedback, instead of searching for an understanding of customers and their
problems and replacing assumptions with facts.
Webvan set off on this kind of plan-driven “marketing death march.” In
its first six months, it acquired an impressive 47,000 new customers, but 71
percent of its 2,000 daily orders were repeat orders, which meant Webvan
needed to quickly secure many more new customers and reduce its high
customer attrition rate. Making matters worse, Webvan had scaled its
spending based on unverified and, it turned out, highly optimistic marketing
guesses.
8. Presumption of Success Leads to Premature
Scaling
The business plan, its revenue forecast, and the product introduction model
assume that every step a startup takes proceeds flawlessly and smoothly to
the next. The model leaves little room for error, learning, iteration or
customer feedback. Nothing says, “Stop or slow down hiring until you
understand customers,” or, “pause to process customer feedback.” Even the
most experienced executives are pressured to hire and staff per the plan
regardless of progress. This leads to the next startup disaster: 
premature
scaling
.
In large companies, the mistakes just have
additional zeros in them.
 
Hiring and spending should accelerate only after sales and marketing
have become predictable, repeatable, scalable processes—not when the plan
says
 
they’re scheduled to begin (or when the “lighthouse” account is signed
or a few sales are made).
In large companies, the mistakes just have additional zeros in them.
Microsoft and Google, powerhouses though may they be, launch product
after product—Google’s Orkut and Wave, Deskbar, Dodgeball, Talk and
Finance; Microsoft’s “Kin,” Vista, Zune, “Bob,” WebTV, MSNTV,
PocketPC—on rigid schedules driven by “the model” and the presumption of
success. Shortly thereafter, a lack of customer response delivers a fast, quiet
funeral for product and management alike.
At Webvan, premature scaling permeated a company culture dominated
by the prevailing venture-capital mantra of the time, “get big fast.” It spent
$18 million to develop proprietary software and $40 million to set up its first
automated warehouse before it had shipped a single item. Premature scaling
had dire consequences, assuring that the Webvan case will be taught in
business schools for decades to come. As customer demand failed to live up
to Webvan’s business plan, the company slowly realized it had overbuilt and
overdesigned. While Webvan had executed to its plan, it had also failed to
pay attention to its customers.
...no business plan survives first contact with
customers.
 
9. Management by Crisis Leads to a 
Death Spiral
At Webvan, the consequences of all the mistakes began to show by the time
of first customer ship. The story usually unfolds like this:
Sales starts to miss its numbers and the board becomes concerned. The
sales VP arrives at a board meeting, still optimistic, and provides a set of
reasonable explanations. The board raises a collective eyebrow. The VP
returns to the field to exhort the troops to work harder. Sales asks
Engineering to build custom versions of the product for special customers,
since this is the only way that the increasingly desperate sales force can close
the sale. Board meetings become increasingly tense. Shortly thereafter, the
sales VP is probably terminated as part of the “solution.”
A new sales VP hired and quickly concludes that the company just
didn’t understand its customers or how to sell them. She decides that the
company’s positioning and marketing strategy were incorrect and that the
product was missing critical features. Since the new sales VP was hired to
“fix” sales, the marketing department must now respond to a sales manager
who believes that whatever was created earlier in the company was wrong.
(After all, it got the old VP fired, right?) A new sales plan buys the new sales
VP a few months’ honeymoon.
Sometimes all it takes is one or two iterations to find the right sales
roadmap and positioning to attract exuberant customers. In tougher times,
when dollars are tighter, the next round of funding may never come.
But the problem at Webvan was not an incorrect sales strategy or
positioning statement. The problem is that 
no business plan survives first
contact with customers.
 The assumptions in the Webvan business plan were
simply a series of untested hypotheses. When real results came in, they
learned that the guesses in their revenue plan were wrong. Focusing on
executing their business plans, Webvan iterated their strategy and their search
for a business model by firing executives.
Failure is an integral part of the search for a
business model.
 
Webvan went public in 1999, and its sea of red ink was reported
quarterly for all to see. Rather than acknowledge its unrealistic plan and scale
back or retrench, the company kept spending against its flailing strategy,
accumulating a $612 million deficit in the process. Seven months after its
IPO, Webvan filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
The ironic Webvan postscript: two other companies on two continents
saw the same opportunity at the same time but developed their businesses by
following Customer Development precepts even though they hadn’t been
published at the time. Peapod and Tesco are both successful, growing, and
profitable today. They started smaller, without carving hypothetical
assumptions and plans in stone, and learned what customers wanted as they
developed business and financial models that worked. Tesco, a UK company
that used retail stores as its launch pad and “warehouse,” today delivers more
than 85,000 orders a week and earns more than $559 million in sales. Peapod,
an American company, has delivered more than 10 million grocery orders to
more than 330,000 customers. Explicitly or implicitly, both understood the
test-and-iterate process of Customer Development.
CHAPTER 2
The Path to the Epiphany: The Customer
Development Model
How narrow the gate and constricted the road that leads to life. And
those who find it are few.
—Matthew 7:14
W
HEN
 W
ILL
 H
ARVEY APPROACHED
 S
TEVE
 B
LANK
 with a new business idea
in June 2004, Steve uncharacteristically almost took out his checkbook before
hearing Will’s pitch. Steve had invested in Will’s previous company,
There.com
, and sat on its board. Before that, Will had been Steve’s
engineering VP at Rocket Science, a video-game company with Steve as
founding CEO. Rocket Science is infamous for appearing on the cover of
Wired
 magazine while blowing through $35 million in venture capital in less
than three years, leaving a crater so deep it has its own iridium layer.
Sitting in Steve’s living room, Will explained his vision for IMVU, a
“virtual world” company with 3D avatar-based instant messaging and social
networking. Will had a world-class reputation. He developed Music
Construction Set, a worldwide 
best-selling video game, at the age of 15. He
earned his bachelor’s, master’s and Ph.D. in computer science at Stanford
while running a video-game company that developed hits like 
Zany Golf
,
Immortal
, and 
Marble Madness
.
Will’s co-founder, Eric Ries, had started an online recruiting company
while earning his computer science degree at Yale. Eric had joined Will’s last
startup as a senior software engineer. That company built a “virtual world” on
the web using a multiyear waterfall development model. After three years,
the product was ready to launch with a big-bang product introduction guided
by a hired big gun, a CEO with large company experience. Only then did
they discover that customers didn’t want or care about most of the features
they had so painstakingly built.
Steve told the IMVU founders that in exchange for his check to help
fund their seed round, they were required to audit his Customer Development
class at U.C. Berkeley’s Haas Business School. As the semester unfolded,
Will and Eric realized that the Customer Development principles they were
learning would save them from repeating the same errors they made in their
previous startup. Thus IMVU’s co-founders became the first Customer
Development pioneers.
...in exchange for his check to help fund IMVU’s
seed round, they were required to audit Steve’s
Customer Development class.
 
Steve sat on IMVU’s board and watched, coached and cheered as Will
and Eric paired the Customer Development process with agile software
development. They built a process that used customer feedback and testing to
help them determine the minimum product features customers most valued.
Based on its initial set of hypotheses about its customer, IMVU set out to
create a 3D chat add-on where users could create customizable avatars and
talk to all their friends on the leading instant messenger of the day, America
Online. After a year, IMVU could see that all its customer hypotheses were
wrong. While customers liked the 3D avatars, they wanted to create their own
separate buddy lists instead of using the one they already had on AOL.
IMVU learned that customers didn’t want to talk to their existing friends but
wanted to meet new people and make 
new
 friends. Quarter after quarter, this
kind of customer feedback created a “two steps forward, one step back”
learning process that supplied the Customer Development principles they
learned in class.
Most startups lack a structured process for testing
their business model hypotheses.
 
IMVU tested, pivoted and tested again until it had the product right.
Instead of creating a crisis, this learning process was an integral part of the
company. IMVU had integrated Customer Development and agile
engineering and had become the first Lean Startup.
The result was a profitable, growing company. Why was IMVU on the
road to success while scores of other virtual world and avatar companies have
long since folded? What was it about Customer Development that gave Will
and Eric a clearer roadmap at IMVU than they had at their previous
company?
An Introduction to Customer Development
One of the things startups have lacked is a definition of who they were. For
years we’ve treated startups like they are just smaller versions of a large
company.
However, we now know that a startup is a 
temporary organization
designed to search for a repeatable and scalable business model
. Within this
definition, a startup can be a new venture or it can be a 
new division or
business unit in an existing company
.
If your 
business model
 is 
unknown
 – that is, just a set of untested
hypotheses — you are a startup 
searching
 for a repeatable business model.
Once your business model (market, customers, features, channels, pricing,
Get/Keep/Grow
 strategy, etc.) is 
known
, you will be 
executing
 it. 
Search
versus 
execution
 is what differentiates a new venture from an 
existing
business unit.
Strategy
The term business model first appeared ~50 years ago, but the concept
didn’t catch on 
until the 1990’s
. It became common vernacular to discuss
business models, but without a standard framework and vernacular, confusion
reigned. In 2010 when Alexander Osterwalder published his book 
Business
Model Generation
 he provided a visual ontology and a clear vernacular that
was sorely needed, and it became clear that this was 
the
 tool to organize
startup hypotheses.
The primary objective of a startup is to 
validate its business model
hypotheses
 (and iterate and pivot until it does). Then it moves into 
execution
mode. It’s at this point the business needs an operating plan, financial
forecasts and other well-understood management tools.
Process
Yet as powerful as the 
Business Model Canvas
 (a template with the nine
blocks of a business model) is, at the end of the day it was a tool for
brainstorming hypotheses without a formal way of testing them.
The 
processes
 used to organize and implement the search for the
business model are 
Customer Development
 and 
Agile Development
. A search
for a business model can be in any new business – in a brand new startup new
or in a new division of an existing company.
The Customer Development model depicted in 
Figure 2.1
 breaks out all
the customer-related activities of an early-stage company into four easy-to-
understand steps. The first two steps of the process outline the “search” for
the business model. Steps three and four “execute” the business model that’s
been developed, tested, and proven in steps one and two. The steps:
Customer discovery
 first captures the founders’ vision and turns it into a
series of business model hypotheses. Then it develops a plan to test
customer reactions to those hypotheses and turn them into facts
Customer validation
 tests whether the resulting business model is
repeatable and scalable. If not, you return to customer discovery
Customer creation
 is the start of execution. It builds end-user demand
and drives it into the sales channel to scale the business
Company-building
 transitions the organization from a startup to a
company focused on executing a validated model
In search, you want a process designed to be dynamic, so you work with a
rough business model description knowing it will change. The model changes
because startups use customer development to run experiments to test the
hypotheses that make up the model. And most of the time these experiments
fail. 
Search embraces failure as a natural part of the startup process.
 Unlike
existing companies that fire executives when they fail to match a plan, 
we
keep the founders and change the model
.
The specific processes associated with the two search steps are described in
the following pages.
Once a company has found a business model (it knows its market,
customers, product/service, channel, pricing, etc.), the organization moves
from search to execution.
The product execution process – managing the life cycle of existing
products and the launch of follow-on products – is the job of the 
product
management
 and engineering organizations. It results in a 
linear process
where you make a plan and refine it into detail. The more granularity you add
to a plan, the better people can execute it: a 
Business Requirement document
(BRD) leads to a Market Requirements Document (MRD) and then gets
handed off to engineering as a 
Functional Specifications Document
 (FSD)
implemented via Agile or Waterfall development.
Organization
Searching for a business model 
requires a different organization
 than
the one used to execute a plan. 
Searching
 requires the company to be
organized around a 
customer development team
 led by the founders. In
contrast, execution (which follows search) requires the company to be
organized by function (product management, sales, marketing, business
development, etc.).
Companies in execution suffer from a “
fear of failure culture
“ (quite
understandable since they were hired to execute a known job spec.) Startups
with Customer Development Teams have a “learning and discovery” culture
for search. The fear of making a move before the last detail is nailed down is
one of the biggest problems existing companies have when they need to learn
how to search.
The idea of 
not
 having a functional organization until the organization
has found a proven business model is one of the hardest things for new
startups to grasp. 
There are no sales, marketing or business development
departments when you are searching for a business model
. If you’ve
organized your startup with those departments, you are not really doing
customer development. (It’s like trying to implement a startup using
Waterfall engineering.)
Customer Development Process
 (Figure 2.1)
“The Search for a Business Model:” Steps, Iteration
and Pivots
In the Customer Development model, each step is represented as a circular
track with recursive arrows in order to highlight that each step is iterative. It’s
a polite way of saying, “Startups are unpredictable. We will have failures and
we will screw it up several times before we get it right.”
In contrast, a traditional product introduction plan makes no provision
for moving backward. To do so would be considered a failure. No wonder
most startup founders are embarrassed when they’re out in the field learning,
failing, and learning some more. The diagram their boards of directors have
beaten into them says, “Move from left to right and you’re a success. Go
right to left and you’ll get fired.” This is why startup sales and marketing
efforts tend to move forward even when it’s patently obvious that they
haven’t nailed the market. Experience with scores of startups shows that only
in business-school case studies does progress addressing customers’ key
needs happen in a smooth, linear fashion.
Meanwhile, the Customer Development model 
embraces the way
startups actually work,
 with moving backward playing a natural and valuable
role in learning 
and discovery. Startups will cycle through each step of the
Customer Development process until they achieve “escape velocity”—
enough measurable progress in finding the business model as defined by
board and team—to propel forward to the next step.
...what could customers tell us except that we were
right?
 
Eric Ries recalls his pre-IMVU days at 
There.com
: “The company sort
of wanted customer feedback but not really. From our perspective, what
could customers tell us except that we were right? The marketing team held
focus groups, but looking back, they were orchestrated to get the answers we
wanted to hear.” The Customer Development model assumes it will take
several iterations of each of the four steps to get it right. The philosophy of
“It’s not only OK to screw it up—plan to learn from it” is the core of the
process.
Note that each of the four steps has a stop sign at its exit. That’s simply
a reminder to think through whether enough has been learned to charge ahead
to the next step. It’s a place to stop and summarize all the learning and, of
course, to candidly assess whether the company has reached “escape
velocity.”
Let’s take a closer look at each of the four steps of the Customer
Development model.
Step 1: Customer Discovery
Customer discovery
 translates a founder’s vision for the company into
hypotheses about each component of the business model and creates a set of
experiments to test each hypothesis. To do this, founders leave guesswork
behind and get out of the building to test customer reaction to each
hypothesis, gain insights from their feedback, and adjust the business model.
Of all the lessons of Customer Development, the importance of getting out of
the building and into conversations with your customers is the most critical.
Only by moving away from the comforts of 
your conference room to truly
engage with and listen to your customers can you learn in depth about their
problems, product features they believe will solve those problems, and the
process in their company for recommending, approving and purchasing
products. You’ll need these details to build a successful product, articulate
your product’s unique differences and propose a compelling reason why your
customers should buy it.
Customer discovery is not about collecting feature lists from prospective
customers or running lots of focus groups. In a startup, the founders define
the product vision and then use customer discovery to find customers and a
market for that vision. (Read that last sentence again. The initial product
specification comes from the founders’ vision, 
not the sum of a set of focus
groups.
)
In a startup, the founders define the product vision
and then use customer discovery to find customers
and a market for that vision.
 
Customer discovery includes two outside-the-building phases. The first
tests customer perception of the problem and the customer’s need to solve it.
Is it important enough that the right product will drive significant numbers of
customers to buy or engage with the product? The second phase shows
customers the product for the first time, assuring that the product (usually a
minimum viable product
 at this point) elegantly solves the problem or fills
the need well enough to persuade lots of customers to buy. When customers
enthusiastically confirm the importance of both the problem and the solution,
customer discovery is complete.
Pivots
 may happen in the customer discovery phase. Failure will
happen. It is a normal part of the startup process. Misunderstanding or just
getting wrong key assumptions about your business model happen often: who
your customers are, what problems they needed to solve, what features would
solve them, how much customers would pay to solve them, etc. Pivots are a
response to these mistakes. A pivot is a major change to one of the nine
business model hypotheses based on learning from customer feedback. Pivots
happen often in the Customer Development process. 
A pivot is not a failure
.
In fact, embracing the fact that startups regularly fail and pivot along the way
is perhaps one of the greatest insights in this book.
 For web/mobile apps, or products, customer discovery begins when
the first “low-fidelity” version of the website or app is up and running. The
website is used to test the business model hypotheses against customers or
users. When the product is bits, a rough minimum viable product can often be
assembled in days if not hours, and entrepreneurs can start the search for
customers almost at once, refining their product and customer-acquisition
strategies on the fly. This approach served many recent startup stars quite
well, including Facebook and Groupon, which began the quest for customers
with rough-hewn products almost the day they opened their doors.
A pivot is not a failure.
 
Another key element of customer discovery is that the founder is free to
ignore all of it. At times (particularly in a new market) a founder’s vision of
what can be is clearer than the vision of potential customers. But this corner
case requires the founder to be able to articulate the “why,” not just ignore it.
The IMVU team shipped a buggy minimalist product quickly and
deployed a whopping marketing budget of $5 a day, using Google AdWords
to attract roughly 100 new daily users to the site. They vigilantly observed,
monitored and assessed every user’s on-site behavior. Heavy (paying) users
were then assaulted with questions in online chats, surveys, phone calls from
founders and more. Perhaps the ugliest (or most flattering) comment: “It
seems to crash my computer every time I use it,” said one user who 
kept
coming back for more!
 But four months after funding, a (clearly minimal)
new product was born, using feedback reflecting the power of customer
discovery.
Step 2: Customer Validation
Customer validation
 proves that the business tested and iterated in customer
discovery has a repeatable, scalable business model that can deliver the
volume of customers required to build a profitable company. During
validation, the company tests its ability to scale (i.e., product, customer
acquisition, pricing and channel activities) against a larger number of
customers with another round of tests, that are larger in scale and more
rigorous and quantitative. During this step, a startup also develops a sales
roadmap for the sales and marketing teams (to be hired later) or validates the
online demand creation plan. Simply put, does adding $1 in sales and
marketing resources generate $2+ of revenue (or users, views, clicks, or
whatever the metric may be)? The resulting roadmap will be field-tested here
by selling the product to early customers.
 In web/mobile apps, customer validation calls for the deployment of
a “hi-fidelity” version of the MVP to test key features in front of customers.
Customer validation proves the existence of a set of customers, confirms that
customers will accept the MVP, and validates serious, measurable purchase
intent among customers.
How? Depending on the business model, validation is measured by “test
sales” that get customers to hand over their money (or become actively
engaged with the product). In a single-sided market (one where the user is the
payer), a steady stream of customer purchases validates the concept far more
solidly than lots of polite words. There’s no surrogate for people paying for a
product. In a “two-sided” or ad-supported business model, a customer base of
hundreds of thousands that’s growing exponentially usually implies that the
company can find a set of advertisers willing to pay to reach those users.
In essence, the first two steps in the Customer Development model—
customer discovery and customer validation—refine, corroborate, and test a
startup’s business model. Completing these first two steps verifies the
product’s core features, the market’s existence, locates customers, tests the
product’s perceived value and demand, identifies the economic buyer (the
person who writes the check to buy the product), establishes pricing and
channel strategies, and checks out the proposed sales cycle and process. Only
when an adequately sized group of customers and a repeatable 
sales process
that yields a profitable business model are clearly identified and validated is
“escape velocity” achieved. At that point, it’s time to move on to the next
step: scaling up, also known as customer creation.
Learning that a hypothesis is wrong is not a crisis.
 
In Will’s and Eric’s pre-IMVU startup, their CEO and board forced
them to wait three years and spend $30 million to perfect the product with
minimal customer feedback. By contrast, IMVU launched a buggy early
product roughly 120 days after it was founded. Amazingly, some customers
loved the buggy product enough not only to pay for it, but also to give the
founders what they wanted: feedback (and money).
The IMVU team used customer feedback relentlessly to drive the
enhancement, addition and deletion of features that “heavy users” liked or
didn’t. One critical pricing discovery led to a 30 percent increase in revenue.
When teenagers bemoaned their lack of access to credit cards, IMVU reacted
quickly by allowing users to pay IMVU via gift cards distributed through 7-
Eleven and Walmart, online, and via other major retail channels.
A Customer Development Bonus: Minimum Waste of Cash and Time
The first two Customer Development steps limit the amount of money a
startup spends until it has tested and validated a business model and is ready
to scale. Instead of hiring sales and marketing staff, leasing new buildings or
buying ads, startup founders get out of the building to test the business model
hypotheses, and that costs very little in cash.
When paired with agile engineering, Customer Development reduces the
amount of wasted code, features or hardware. Agile development builds the
product in small increments, allowing the company to test and measure
customer reactions 
to each new iteration of the product. It won’t take three
years to find out that customers don’t want or need or can’t use the features
the team labored lovingly over.
Since the Customer Development model assumes that most startups
cycle through discovery and validation multiple times, it allows a well-
managed company to carefully estimate and frugally husband its cash. It also
helps “husband” founders’ equity, since the closer a company is to a
predictable, scalable business model, the higher its likely valuation—
preserving more stock for the founders at fundraising time. The IMVU
founders, for example, only hired product development teams (not sales,
marketing, or business development) until they had proof in hand of a
business worth building. With that proof, the company can move through the
third and fourth steps, customer creation and company-building, to capitalize
on the opportunity.
Step 3: Customer Creation
Customer creation builds on the company’s initial sales success. It’s where
the company steps on the gas, spending large sums to scale by creating end-
user demand and driving it into the sales channel. This step follows customer
validation, moving heavy marketing spending after a startup has learned how
to acquire customers, thus controlling the cash burn rate to protect a most
precious “green” asset, cash.
Customer creation varies by startup type. Some startups enter existing
markets well-defined by their competitors, others create new markets where
no product or company exists, and still others attempt a hybrid by re-
segmenting an existing market as a low-cost entrant or by creating a niche.
Each market-type strategy demands different customer creation activities and
costs. (Market type is addressed in depth 
later
.)
Initially, IMVU ran a wide range of low-cost customer segmentation
experiments. Soon they identified two distinct customer segments—teens and
moms—and spending ramped up to underwrite two entirely different
customer creation efforts.
Step 4: Company-Building
“Graduation day” arrives when the startup finds a scalable, repeatable
business model. At this point it’s fundamentally no longer the temporary
search-oriented organization known as a startup—it’s a company! In a
sometimes-bittersweet transition out of startup mode, company-building
refocuses the team’s energy away from “search” mode and to a focus on
execution, swapping its informal learning- and discovery-oriented Customer
Development team for formal, structured departments such as Sales,
Marketing and Business Development, among others, complete with VPs.
These executives now focus on building their departments to scale the
company.
This is where the entrepreneurs’ version of a Shakespearean tragedy
often takes center stage, as VCs realize they have a “hit” with potential for a
large return on their investment. All of a sudden, the passionate visionary
entrepreneur is no longer deemed the right person to lead the now-successful
company he or she has nurtured from cocktail napkin to high-trajectory. The
board—graciously or not—ousts the founder and all his or her innate
customer understanding, trading him or her in for a “suit,” an experienced
operating executive. There goes the neighborhood, as the company declares
success, the entrepreneurial spark often sputters, and process often drowns
energy.
At IMVU, the founders saw the company rapidly scaling beyond their
skill set. But instead of being fired, they recognized the need for a seasoned
operating executive, recruited a skilled CEO, and named themselves
chairmen of the board and active board members. Their new CEO was skilled
at managing the transition from searching for a business to execution and
grew the company steadily.
CHAPTER 3
The Customer Development Manifesto
B
EFORE DIVING HEADFIRST INTO THE DETAILS
 of the Customer Development
process, it’s crucial to review the 14 rules that make up 
The Customer
Development Manifesto
. Embrace them. Review them regularly with the team
and (maybe after the IPO) consider perhaps even etching them in marble at
world headquarters.
Rule No. 1:
There Are No Facts Inside Your Building, So Get
Outside.
On Day One, the startup is a faith-based enterprise built on its founders’
vision and a notable absence of facts. The founders’ job is to translate this
vision and these hypotheses into facts. Facts live outside the building, where
future customers (prospects, really) live and work, so that’s where you need
to go. Nothing is more fundamental to Customer Development, and nothing
is harder to do. It’s much easier to write code, build hardware, have meetings
and write reports than it is to find and listen to potential customers. But that’s
what separates the winners from the losers.
Facts live outside the building, where future
customers live and work...
 
In Customer Development, the 
founders gather firsthand experience
about every component of the business model. The team can support the
founders, but firsthand 
experience by definition cannot be delegated.
 This
customer research must be done by founders because:
Key customer feedback points are random, unpredictable, and often
painful to hear. Employees hate to deliver bad news to higher-ups
Employees have far less at stake and seldom listen as acutely, and they
don’t get heard adequately when they report back. It’s too easy to
dismiss their findings as “hearsay” or to ignore critical points of
feedback
Consultants have even less at stake than employees and often color their
commentary to either tell the client what he wants to hear or deliver
messages that can lead to extended consulting relationships. This is also
second- or third-hand feedback and too diluted or diffused to provide
value
Only a founder can embrace the feedback, react to it, and adeptly make
the decisions necessary to change or pivot key business model components.
Rule No. 2:
Pair Customer Development with Agile
Development
Customer Development is useless unless the product
development organization can iterate the product
with speed and agility.
 
Customer Development is useless unless the product development
organization can iterate the product with speed and agility. If Engineering
builds the product using waterfall development, it will be deaf, dumb and
blind to customer input except during a short period when it’s specifying the
product. The rest of the time, engineers are locked into an implementation
cycle, unable to change the product features without intolerable delay. By
contrast, a startup engineering organization 
using an agile methodology is
designed to continually take customer input and deliver a product that iterates
readily around an MVP or its minimum feature set.
In this book, 
agile engineering/development
 refers to the rapid
deployment, iterative development and continuous discovery processes that
hardware or software companies can use. We don’t advocate any particular
flavor, just its necessity. The Customer Development process provides the
continuous customer input to make agile work.
Before the company even starts, the founders need to reach a deep and
inexorable commitment to the customer/agile development partnership.
Rule No. 3:
Failure is an Integral Part of the Search
One of the key differences between a startup and an existing company is the
one that’s never explicitly stated: “startups go from failure to failure.”
In contrast, existing companies have learned what works and doesn’t.
Failures in an existing company are an exception. They happen when
someone screws up. In a startup, you’re 
searching,
 not 
executing,
 and the
only way to find the right path is to try lots of experiments and take a lot of
wrong turns. 
Failure is part of the process
.
If you’re afraid to fail in a startup, you’re destined
to do so.
 
Failures are not truly failures, per se but an integral part of the startup
learning process. You’ll be running dozens if not hundreds of pass/fail tests
—on your pitch, your features, your pricing, and on and on—so get ready to
accept failure and move on. When something isn’t working, successful
founders orient themselves to the new facts, decide what needs fixing, and act
decisively.
The Customer Development process demands frequent, agile iteration,
followed, of course, by testing of the iteration that often leads to another
iteration or pivot, which leads to more testing and...
If you’re afraid to fail in a startup, you’re destined to do so.
Rule No. 4:
Make Continuous Iterations and Pivots
The strategy of embracing failure in Customer Development demands
frequent, agile iteration and pivots. A pivot is a substantive change in one or
more of the nine boxes of the business model canvas. (For example, a pricing
change from freemium to subscription model or a customer segment shift
from boys 12-15 years old to women 45-60.) Or it can be more complex,
such as a change of target customer or user. Iterations, meanwhile, are minor
changes to business model components (e.g., changing pricing from $99 to
$79).
Groupon’s legendary $12 billion pivot is a perfect
example.
 
When a company is limping along, only a dramatic change to one or
more business model components can get it back on the road to success.
Groupon’s legendary $12 billion pivot (their IPO valuation) is a perfect
example. Groupon was started from a company called the Point. It was
struggling, at best, as a social media platform working to get people together
to solve problems, but was about to run out of money.
The most effective campaigns on The Point were those that saved people
money by grouping or bundling their purchases. The founders started
blogging various deals from different businesses each day. They called this,
“Get Your 
Groupon.com
.” Groupon’s first offer hit in October of 2008: buy
two pizzas for the 
price of one in the shop on the first floor of its Chicago
headquarters. Twenty people bought the deal and the company was well on
its way to its $12-billion pivot.
Pivots are driven by the learnings and insight from a continuous stream
of “pass/fail” tests you run throughout discovery and validation.
The best startup founders don’t hesitate to make the change. They admit
when hypotheses are wrong and adapt.
Rule No. 5:
No Business Plan Survives First Contact with
Customers So Use a 
Business Model Canvas
There’s only one reason for a business plan: some investor who went to
business school doesn’t know any better and wants to see one. But once it has
delivered financing, the business plan is fundamentally useless.
Entrepreneurs often mistake their business plan as a cookbook for execution,
failing to recognize that it is only a collection of unproven assumptions. At its
back, a revenue plan blessed by an investor, and composed overwhelmingly
of guesses, suddenly becomes an operating plan driving hiring, firing, and
spending. Insanity.
The difference between a static business plan and a
dynamic model could well be the difference between
flameout and success.
 
The difference between a static business plan and a dynamic business
model could well be the difference between a flameout and success. Startups
should dump the business 
plan
 and adopt the flexible business 
model.
A business model describes the flow between key components of the
company:
value proposition,
 which the company offers (product/service, benefits)
customer segments,
 such as users, and payers, or moms or teens
distribution channels
 to reach customers and offer them the value
proposition
customer relationships
 to create demand
revenue streams
 generated by the value proposition(s)
resources
 needed to make the business model possible
activities
 necessary to implement the business model
partners
 who participate in the business and their motivations for doing
so
cost structure
 resulting from the business model
The business model 
canvas
 (see 
Figure 3.1
) presents a visual overview
of the nine components of a business on one page. In this book, Alexander
Osterwalder’s business model canvas serves as the scorecard for the customer
discovery process described in Step One. Osterwalder’s book 
Business Model
Generation
 (Wiley, 2010) provides the structure for the canvas.
Business Model Canvas
 (Figure 3.1)
As a startup moves through the Customer Development process, it will
use the business model canvas as a scorecard, by posting the hypotheses
about each component of the model and then revising the hypotheses as the
founders gather facts. Think of your first version of the business model
canvas as the starting point showing the hypotheses that must be confirmed in
face-to-face or online interaction with customers. More often than not, the
customers will reject components of the business model, saying, “I’d rather
buy that from a retailer,” or, “The product needs to have these features to be
important to me.” As customers approve or dispute the business model
hypotheses, the company either accepts the customers’ approval or pivots to
change its business model to better target the opportunity.
Using the business model canvas as a guide makes it easier to figure out
where and how to pivot, since the team can visually diagram its alternatives
and see what it needs to change. Each time the founders iterate or pivot (see
Rule No. 4
) in response to customer feedback, they draw a new canvas
showing the changes. Over time, these multiple canvases form a “flip book”
that shows the evolution of the business model. Agile startups can end up
with a six-inch-thick stack of business model diagrams they can burn at the
IPO-celebration bonfire.
Much more about how to use business model diagrams to “keep score”
throughout the customer discovery process can be found in 
Chapter 4
.
...hypothesis is just a fancy word for “guess.”
 
Rule No. 6:
Design Experiments and Test to Validate Your
Hypotheses
Initially, hypothesis is just a fancy word for “guess.” To turn hypotheses into
facts, founders need to get out of the building and 
test
 them in front of
customers. But how do you test? And what do you want to learn from the
tests? Testing and learning require you to be thoughtful on constructing and
designing your tests. We call this “designing the experiments.”
Customer Development experiments are short, simple, objective
pass/fail tests. You’re looking for a strong signal in the signal/noise noise
ratio, something like five of the first 12 customers you call on saying “I need
this right now, even if it’s still buggy.” Early tests aren’t necessarily precise,
but should give you a “good enough” signal to proceed.
The Customer Development Insight Cycle
 (Figure 3.2)
Start by asking yourself, “What insight do I need to move forward?”
Then ask, “What’s the simplest test I can run to get it?” Finally, think about,
“How do I design an experiment to run this simple test?”
One of the things that trips up engineering founders is thinking that
these tests have to be actual code, hardware or the real product. Most of the
time you can mock-up the web page or create a demo or physical prototype to
elicit valuable learning.
Rule No. 7:
Agree on Market Type. It Changes Everything
One of the radical insights guiding this book is that 
not all startups are alike.
One of the key ways in which they are different is in the relationship between
a startup’s 
new product and its market. These product/market relationships
generally fit one of these descriptions:
bringing a new product into an 
existing market
bringing a new product into a 
new market
bringing a new product into an existing market and trying to:
re-segment that market as a low-cost entrant or
re-segment that market 
as a niche entrant
cloning
 a business model that’s successful in another country
What confused entrepreneurs for decades is that the traditional product
introduction model works when introducing a product into an existing market
with a known business model (i.e., known customers, channels and markets).
However, since the majority of startups are not pursuing known markets
(those in new or re-segmented categories), they don’t really know who their
customers will be. These types of startups are searching for a repeatable and
scalable business model.
Market type influences everything a company does.
 
Market type influences everything a company does.
 Strategy and tactics
that work for one market type seldom work for another. Market type
determines the startup’s customer feedback and acquisition activities and
spending. It changes customer needs, adoption rates, product features and
positioning as well as its launch strategies, channels and activities. In sum,
different market types require dramatically different discovery, MVPs, and
sales and marketing strategies.
In existing markets,
 where customers exist, marketing is relatively easy:
users can describe the market and the attributes that matter the most to them.
The new product or service typically runs faster, does something better or
cheaper, or 
otherwise improves on a customer-defined attribute. Users, the
market, and competitors are known, and competition involves comparing the
product and its features with others.
In a new market,
 a company lets customers do something they couldn’t do
before by creating something that never existed before. Or it dramatically
lowers costs to create a new class of users. By definition, new markets have
no customers yet, so there’s nobody to know what the product can do or why
they should buy. This makes getting feedback and creating demand
particularly challenging, since the product is unknown to users and the
market is undefined and unknown, and costly to develop.
The key isn’t competing, but instead understanding whether a large
customer base exists and whether customers can be persuaded to buy. A
classic founder error in a new market is the “fast-burn” spending of sales and
marketing funds, a practice that may be appropriate when selling to existing
customers in a known market, but makes no sense in a new market. The new-
vs.-existing axis is at the core of the market-type definition.
Re-segmenting an existing market
 is useful when the incumbent is too
difficult to attack head-on (like Amazon, Facebook, or Microsoft). A re-
segmentation strategy is based on the startup’s market and customer
knowledge, ideally identifying a market opportunity that incumbents are
missing, which usually takes one of two forms: a low-cost strategy or a niche
strategy. (Unlike differentiation, segmentation forges a distinct spot in
customers’ minds that is unique, valuable, and in demand.)
Low-cost re-segmentation
 is just what it sounds like. Are there
customers at the low end of an existing market who will buy “good enough”
performance at a substantially lower price?
Niche re-segmentation
 looks at an existing market and asks whether
some segment of this market would buy a new product designed to address
more specific needs. Can some sizable portion of the market be convinced
that a characteristic of the new product is radical enough to change the rules
and shape of an existing market. 
See Chan Kim and Renee Mauborgne’s
work on “
Blue Ocean Strategy
” for another way to think of re-segmenting a
market.
Cloning an existing business model
 is a powerful technique when an
existing business has been proven in one country but has not yet been
introduced in another. Startups in Russia, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan and
China (each with its own large local market and language and cultural
barriers) can adopt, borrow, or copy a successful American business model
and customize it for local language and buying preferences. (Soon ideas from
those countries will be cloned in the U.S.)
For example, Baidu in China and Yandex in Russia are the equivalent of
Google in their respective markets. And Qzone, RenRen, PengYou and
Kaixin are the Facebooks of China, while Vkontakte and Odnoklassniki play
the same role in Russia.
Startup companies generally enter one of these four market types and
ultimately must commit to one. The consequences of a wrong market-type
choice will prove to be severe in the customer creation stage. While market
type is ultimately a “late-binding decision,” a working hypothesis helps frame
early customer discovery issues. Market-type decision-making is explored in
greater detail in 
Chapter 4
.
...the few financial metrics to track: cash-burn rate,
number of months’ worth of cash left...
 
Rule No. 8:
Startup Metrics Differ from Those in Existing
Companies
We now have several centuries’ worth of performance metrics for existing
businesses—P&Ls balance sheets, cash-flow forecasts and line-of-business
analyses, plus scores of others. Here’s hoping your startup becomes big
enough to need them someday. In the past (not so long ago), we used these
tools with startups because we didn’t know what else to measure. We now
know that startup metrics should focus on tracking the startup’s progress
converting guesses and hypotheses into incontrovertible facts rather than
measuring the execution of a static plan. It’s critical 
that board and
management continuously test and measure each hypothesis until the entire
business model is worth scaling into a company.
If the company is venture-backed, management and investors must agree
on a set of metrics that truly matter and work toward a report or “dashboard”
that essentially replaces the P&L, cash flow, and balance sheet as
centerpieces of early board meetings.
Startup metrics track the results of pass/fail tests and the iterations they lead
to:
Have the customer problem and product features been validated?
Does the minimum feature set resonate with customers?
Who in fact is the customer, and have initial customer-related
hypotheses on the likes of value proposition, customer segments, and
channels been validated through face-to-face customer interaction?
Customer-validation questions might include: average order size,
customer lifetime value, average time to first order, rate of sales pipeline
growth, improvement in close rate, and revenue per salesperson.
In addition to the startup metrics above, the relatively few financial
metrics that a startup board should be tracking are cash-burn rate, number of
months’ worth of cash left, short-term hiring plans, and amount of time until
the company reaches cash-flow break-even.
Make sure decisions are fact-based, not faith-based.
 
Rule No. 9:
Fast Decision-Making, Cycle Time, Speed and
Tempo
Speed matters at startups where the only absolute certainty is that the bank
balance declines every day. While 
Rule No. 4
 addresses iterations and pivots,
it doesn’t specify how long they should take. Unequivocally, the faster the
better, since the 
faster these “learn, build, pivot” or “iterate, build” cycles
happen, the greater the odds of finding a scalable business model with the
cash on hand. If cycles happen too slowly, the startup runs out of cash and
dies. The biggest impediment to cycle time is psychological: it requires the
admission of being wrong or even of suffering a short-term tactical defeat.
While pivots and iterations are about speed outside the building, speed
also matters inside the company. Most startup decisions are made in the face
of uncertainty. There’s seldom a clear-cut, perfect solution to any
engineering, customer or competitor problem, and founders shouldn’t
agonize over trying to find one. This doesn’t mean gambling with the
company’s fortunes on a whim. It means adopting plans with an acceptable
degree of risk and doing so quickly. (Make sure these decisions are fact-
based, not faith-based.) In general, the company that consistently makes and
implements decisions rapidly gains a tremendous, often-decisive competitive
advantage.
...startups should make reversible decisions before
anyone leaves the CEO’s office.
 
Startup decisions have two states: 
reversible and irreversible
. A
reversible decision could be adding or dropping a product feature or a new
algorithm in the code or targeting a specific set of customers. If the decision
proves a bad one, it can be unwound in a reasonable period of time. An
irreversible decision such as firing an employee, launching a product, or
signing a long lease on expensive office space is usually difficult or
impossible to reverse.
Startups should as policy, 
make reversible decisions before anyone
leaves the CEO’s office
 or before a meeting ends. Perfect decision-making is
both unimportant and impossible, and what matters more is forward
momentum and a tight, fact-based feedback loop to quickly recognize and
reverse bad decisions. By the time a big company gets the committee to get
the subcommittee to pick a meeting date, most startups have made 20
decisions, reversed five, and implemented the other 15.
Learning to make decisions quickly is just part of the equation. Agile
startups have mastered another trick: tempo—the ability to make quick
decisions consistently and at all levels in the company. Speed and tempo are
integral parts of startup DNA, and a great startup’s tempo is often 10 times
that of a large company.
Rule No. 10:
It’s All About Passion
A startup without driven, passionate people is dead the day it opens its doors.
“Startup people” are different.
 They think different. In contrast, most people
are great at execution. They work to live, do their jobs well, and enjoy their
family, their lives, their hobbies and often even enjoy mowing the lawn.
They’re terrific at executing fixed tasks, and it’s a wonderful life for almost
everyone.
The people leading almost every successful startup in history are just
different. They’re a very tiny percentage of the world population, and their
brains are wired for chaos, uncertainty, and blinding speed. They’re
irrationally focused on customer needs and delivering great products. Their
job is their life. It’s not 9-to-5, it’s 24/7. These are the people who found
high-growth, highly-successful scalable startups.
Startups demand execs who are comfortable with
uncertainty, chaos and change.
 
Rule No. 11:
Startup Job Titles Are Very Different from a Large
Company’s
In an existing company, job titles reflect the way tasks are organized to
execute a known business model. For example, the “Sales” title in an existing
company means there’s a sales team repeatedly selling a known product to a
well-understood group of customers, using a standard corporate presentation
with an 
existing price list and standard terms, conditions and contract. The
“Sales” title in an existing company is all about execution around a series of
knowns.
Compared with big companies, startups need executives whose skills are
180 degrees different. 
Startups demand execs who are comfortable with
uncertainty, chaos and change
—with presentations and offers changing
daily, with the product changing often, with probing and gaining insights
from failure rather than high-fiving a success. In short, they need the rare
breed:
open to learning and discovery—highly curious, inquisitive, and creative
eager to search for a repeatable and scalable business model
agile enough to deal with daily change and operating “without a map”
readily able to wear multiple hats, often on the same day
comfortable celebrating failure when it leads to learning and iteration
We suggest replacing traditional execution-oriented sales, marketing and
business development titles with a single title: the Customer Development
team. At first, this “team” will consist of the company’s founder(s), who talks
with customers to gain enough insights to develop the minimum viable
product. Later, as the startup moves into customer validation, the team may
grow to include a dedicated “sales closer” responsible for the logistics of
getting early orders signed. The closer shouldn’t be confused with a
traditional sales VP. To succeed in this process, the team must have:
the ability to listen to customer objections and understand whether they
are issues about the product, the presentation, the pricing or something
else (or the wrong type of customer)
experience in talking to and moving between customers and engineers
confidence amid a state of constant change, often operating “without a
map”
the ability to walk in their customers’ shoes, understanding how they
work and the problems they face
Some would say this checklist isn’t bad for identifying great entrepreneurs.
Rule No. 12:
Preserve All Cash Until Needed. Then Spend.
The goal of Customer Development is not to avoid spending money but to
preserve cash while 
searching for the repeatable and scalable business
model
. Once found, then spend like there’s no tomorrow
. This paragraph is
worth deconstructing:
Preserve cash:
 When a startup has unlimited cash (Internet bubbles,
frothy venture climate), it can iterate on its mistakes by burning more dollars.
When money is tight, without dollars to redo mistakes, it’s crucial to
minimize waste. The Customer Development process preserves cash by not
hiring any sales and marketing staff until the founders turn hypotheses into
facts and discover a viable product/market fit.
While searching:
 Customer Development observes that at the start, the
company and its business model are based solely on hypotheses, not facts,
and that the founders need to get out of the building to turn these hypotheses
into customer data. This “get out of the building” approach, combined with
rapid iteration and pivots, is central to the model’s customer discovery and
validation steps.
...preserve cash while searching for the repeatable
and scalable business model...
 
Repeatable:
 Startups may get orders that stem from board members’
customer relationships, engineering one-offs, or heroic single-shot efforts by
the CEO. These are great, but they aren’t repeatable by a sales organization.
Search not for the one-off revenue hits but rather for a pattern that can be
replicated by a sales organization selling off a price list or by customers
regularly visiting the website.
Scalable:
 The goal is not to get one customer but many—and for each
additional customer to add incremental revenue 
and
 profit. The test is: Does
the addition of one more salesperson or more marketing dollars bring in more
gross profit (or users or clicks) than you invested? Who influences a sale?
Who recommends a sale? 
Who is the decision-maker? Who is the economic
buyer? Where’s the budget for purchasing this type of product? What’s the
customer acquisition cost? Affirming the 
repeatable, scalable sales model
 is
the customer validation step of Customer Development, its most important
phase. Has the team learned how to sell a target customer? Can this happen
before the startup runs out of money?
Search not for the one-off revenue hits but rather
for a pattern...
 
Business model:
 A business model answers the basic questions of how
the company makes money. Is this a revenue play, or is it a freemium model
seeking users? Something else? Who’s the customer?
Spend like there’s no tomorrow:
 The goal of an investor-backed startup
is not to build a lifestyle business. The goal is to reach venture scale (10
times the return on investment or more). When management and board agree
that they’ve found a repeatable and scalable sales model (i.e., have a
product/market fit), 
then invest the dollars to create end-user demand and
drive those customers into the sales channel
.
Rule No. 13:
Communicate and Share Learning
An integral part of Customer Development’s “learning and discovery”
philosophy is 
sharing everything that’s learned outside the building
 with
employees, co-founders and even investors.
The traditional way to do this is via weekly company meetings to keep
employees informed and board meetings to let the investors understand the
progress made in the search for the business model. But technology in the
21st-century has taken us to places we never could get to before. We can now
communicate all we’re learning in near-real time to everyone who needs to
know.
We strongly recommend that the founders keep and share all their
activities in the 
customer discovery step
 via a blog, CRM or product
management tool. Think of it as a narrative of the customer discovery
process. It records hypotheses the startup started with, who the team has
talked to, the questions asked, the tests conducted, what’s been learned, and
questions for advisors or investors. While this may seem burdensome, it takes
less time than having a weekly coffee with an advisory board member. What
results is a communications tool allowing outsiders to view the company’s
progress up close and to offer suggestions and course corrections.
Rule No. 14:
Customer Development Success Begins With Buy-
In
Customer Development’s “learning and discovery” philosophy can be
immensely disorienting to a founder, engineer or investor who has spent his
or her career 
executing a plan.
 For Customer Development to succeed,
everyone on the team—from investor or parent company to engineers,
marketeers and founders—needs to understand and agree that the Customer
Development process is different to its core. If the engineering VP is talking
waterfall development or the board demands a rigid timetable, Customer
Development is destined for disaster. Everyone must accept the process,
recognizing that this is a fluid, nonlinear 
search for a business model
 that can
sometimes last for years.
The Customer Development process is different to
its core.
 
Customer Development changes almost every aspect of startup behavior,
performance, metrics, and, as often as not, success potential. It’s not just a
“nice to do” while executing the revenue model in the back of the business
plan. Customer Development 
reinvents the business model on the fly,
iterating often and pivoting 
whenever indicated. Founders need to have the
commitment of the team 
and board
 before embarking on Customer
Development. Ensure that all understand and agree that it’s iterative,
necessary, and worthwhile and that it changes the benchmarks and metrics
along the way.
Comments such as “The product is already spec’ed, and we can’t change
the features since development is already underway,” or “We already have
the factory (or sales team or marketing materials) built,” or “We have to
launch to make the numbers in the plan,” are all red flags. To succeed at
Customer Development, the company must abandon the old model’s
emphasis on execution of a fantasy business plan. Instead it must commit to a
Customer Development process stressing learning, discovery, failure, and
iteration in the search for a successful business model. If you’re ready for this
process, this book will tell you how to do it.
Summary: The Customer Development
Process
The Customer Development process reflects the best practices of winning
startups. It is the only approach for web-based businesses where failure is
certain without constant customer feedback and product iteration as they
search for their audiences. Customer Development’s fast cycle times and
inherent cash conservation gives all entrepreneurs more chances to pivot,
iterate, and succeed before the bank account runs dry. Describe this model to
entrepreneurs who have taken companies all the way to a lucrative exit and
beyond, and heads nod in recognition.
While each step has its own specific objectives, the process as a whole
has one overarching goal: discovering the repeatable, scalable, and ultimately
profitable business before running out of cash. This transforms the company
from a set of founding hypotheses into a moneymaking endeavor.
Customer Development is damn hard work. You
can’t fake it.
 
Customer Development is damn hard work. You can’t fake it. You can’t
just do the slides or “do” the process in a weekend. It’s a full-time, full-body-
contact sport. It’s a long-term commitment to changing the way a startup is
built. But it’s also proven to increase the chances of startup success.
Overview of the Customer Discovery Process


CHAPTER 4
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
No startup business plan survives first contact with customers.
—Steve Blank
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.
—Lao Tzu
I
RIDIUM WAS ONE OF THE BIGGEST STARTUP
 gambles ever made—a bold and
audacious $5.2 billion bet. Founded by Motorola and a global partnership of
18 companies in 1991, Iridium planned to build a mobile telephone system
that would work “anywhere on Earth,” from ships in the middle of the ocean
to the jungles of Africa to remote mountain peaks where no cell towers
existed.
How? With an out-of-this-world business plan. First, the company
bought a fleet of 15 rockets from Russia, the U.S. and China. Next, it
launched an armada of 72 private satellites into orbit, where they acted like
500-mile-high cell towers providing phone coverage to any spot on Earth.
Seven years after Iridium’s founding, its satellites were in place. But nine
months after the first call was made in 1998, the company was in Chapter 11
bankruptcy. When Iridium crashed back to Earth, it ranked as one of the
largest startup failures on record. What went wrong?
When Iridium was founded in 1991, worldwide cell-phone coverage was
sparse, unreliable and expensive. Cell-phone handsets were the size of lunch
boxes. Iridium put together a business plan that made assumptions about
customers, their problems and the product needed to solve those problems.
Other assumptions about sales channel, partnerships, and revenue model all
added up to a set of financial forecasts that Iridium would soon be printing
money.

One of the largest startup failures on record as they
executed their business plan.
 
But in the seven-plus years it took Iridium to go from concept to launch,
innovation in mobile- and cell-phone networks moved at blinding speed. By
the time Iridium launched, there were far fewer places on the planet where
cell-phone service was unavailable. Traditional cell-phone companies
provided coverage in the most valuable parts of the world. Prices for cell
service shrunk as fast as phone handsets did. In contrast, Iridium’s satellite
phone was bigger than a brick and weighed about as much. Worse, Iridium’s
cell phone couldn’t make calls from cars or buildings, since it required line-
of-sight “connection” to the satellites. Instead of 50 cents per minute for a
regular cell call, Iridium’s calls cost $7 a minute, plus $3,000 for the handset
itself.
Iridium’s potential market shrunk nearly every day. Instead of a massive
worldwide market of potential users, it had drawn only a small group willing
to pay 
its prices and put up with the product’s many limitations. But
Iridium’s business model assumptions and plans were firmly fixed as if it was
still 1991. The company spent $5 billion building a business over eight years
without ever focusing on four key questions:
Have we identified a problem a customer wants to see solved?
Does our product solve this customer problem or need?
If so, do we have a viable and profitable business model?
Have we learned enough to go out and sell?
Answering these questions is the purpose of the first step in the
customer discovery process. This chapter explains how to go about it.
(Twenty years later, Iridium emerged from bankruptcy. In 2000, an
investor group bought $6 billion worth of its assets for $25 million. After a
long climb back, the company celebrated its 500,000
th
 customer in September
2011.)
Customers don’t behave like your business plan.
 
The Customer Discovery Philosophy
A startup begins with the vision of its founders: a vision of a new product or
service that solves a customer’s problems or needs and of how it will reach
its many customers. Customer discovery lowers the odds of spending zillions
and getting zeros in return as the Iridium team did. So the No. 1 goal of
customer discovery amounts to this: turning the founders’ initial hypotheses
about their market and customers into facts.
Get Out of the Building
Facts exist only outside the building
, where customers live, so the most
important aspect of customer discovery is getting out of the building, in front
of customers. And not for a few days or a week, but repeatedly, over weeks if
not months. This critical task can’t be assigned to junior staffers and must be
driven by founders. Only after the founders have performed this step will
they know whether they have a valid vision or just a hallucination.
Sounds simple, doesn’t it? But for anyone who has worked in
established companies, the customer discovery process is disorienting. All the
rules about new-product management in large companies are turned upside
down. It’s instructive to enumerate all things you are 
not
 going to do:
understand the needs and wants of 
all
 customers
make a list of 
all
 the features customers want before they buy your
product
hand Product Development a features list of the sum of 
all
 customer
requests
hand Product Development a detailed marketing-requirements document
run focus groups and test customers’ reactions to your product to see if
they will buy
What you 
are
 going to do is develop your product for the few, not the
many. Moreover, you’re going to start building your product even before you
know whether you have any customers for it.
On a startups first day, there’s limited—if any—
customer input.
 
For an experienced marketing or product management executive, these
ideas are not only disorienting and counterintuitive but heretical. Why aren’t
the needs of 
all
 potential customers important? What is it about a first
product from a new 
company that’s different from follow-on products in a
large company? What is it about a startup’s first customers that make the
rules so different?
Search for the Problem/Solution Fit
The customer discovery process searches for problem/solution fit: “have we
found a problem lots of people want us to solve (or a need they want us to
fill)” and “does our solution (a product, a website, or an app) solve the
problem in a compelling way?” At its core, the essence of customer discovery
is to determine whether your startup’s value proposition matches the
customer segment it plans to target.
Problem/solution fit is virtually identical to what’s sometimes called
“product/ market fit,” as the previous paragraph indicates. As a result, 
we use
the terms somewhat interchangeably
 throughout the book. Do realize,
however, that in multi-sided markets, there may be multiple value
propositions and multiple customer segments. But problem/solution fit is
only achieved when the revenue model, pricing, and customer acquisition
efforts all match up with the customers’ needs.
Develop the Product for the Few, Not the Many
In existing companies, the goal of traditional product management and
marketing is to develop a market-requirements document (MRD) for
engineering that contains the sum of 
all
 possible customer feature requests,
prioritized in a collaborative effort among Product Management, Marketing,
Sales, and Engineering. Marketing or Product Management hosts focus
groups, analyzes sales data from the field, and looks at customer feature
requests and complaints. This information leads to the adding of requested
features to the product specification, and the engineering team builds them
into the next product release.
While this process is rational for an established company entering an
existing market, it’s folly for startups. Why? Startups aren’t small versions of
large, existing companies where there’s plenty of customer knowledge and
input. In established companies, the MRD process ensures that engineering
will build a product that appeals to existing customers in a known market,
where customers and their needs are known. On a startup’s first day, there’s
limited—if any—customer input for creating a formal product specification.
In a startup, the first product is not designed to satisfy a mainstream
customer. No startup can afford to build a product with every feature a
mainstream customer needs all at once. The product would take years to get
to market and be obsolete by the time it arrived. Instead, successful startups
solve this conundrum by focusing development and early selling efforts on a
very small group of early customers who have bought into the startup’s
vision. These visionary customers will give the company the feedback
necessary to add features to the product over time.
Earlyvangelists are willing to make a leap of faith
and buy an early product.
 
Earlyvangelists:
 The Most Important Customers of
All
Enthusiasts who spread the good news about your product to friends, family
or co-workers are often called evangelists. But a new word is needed to
describe the early adopters—the visionary customers—who buy unfinished
and untested products, because they want to “first,” whether it’s for the sake
of gaining a competitive edge or winning bragging rights. We call these early
adopters 
earlyvangelists
. Unlike “mainstream” business or consumer-product
customers who want to buy a finished, completed, tested product,
earlyvangelists are willing to make a leap of faith and buy an early product
from a startup. Every industry has a small subset of visionaries willing to take
a leap of faith on an early product.
One of the mistakes that startup founders make is to give away or
heavily discount early alpha/beta products to blue-chip customers. In single-
sided markets (where the user is the payer) earlyvangelists will be happy to
pay for early access to the product.
 If they won’t, they aren’t earlyvangelists.
Their willingness to pay is a critical part of the customer discovery process.
You’ll use it to test the entire buying process.

Earlyvangelist Characteristics
 (Figure 4.1)
 In web/mobile apps, where multi-sided markets (separate users and
payers) are often found, earlyvangelists can be users or payers. But even as
nonpaying users, 
these earlyvangelists are willing or eager accelerators of
your viral growth.
Earlyvangelists are willing or eager accelerators of
your viral growth.
 
In both physical and web/mobile channels, earlyvangelists display these
common characteristics (see 
Figure 4.1
):
They have a problem or need.
They understand they have a problem.
They’re actively searching for a solution and have a timetable for
finding it.
The problem is so painful that they’ve cobbled together an interim
solution.
They’ve committed, or can quickly acquire, budget dollars to purchase.
Think of earlyvangelists’ characteristics along a scale of customer pain.
Earlyvangelist customers will be found only at the top of the scale—those
who have already been looking for a solution, built a home-grown solution
(whether in a company by building a software solution or at home by taping
together a fork, a light bulb and a vacuum cleaner) and have or can acquire a
budget. These people are perfect earlyvangelist candidates. They can be
relied on for feedback and initial sales; they’ll tell others about the product
and spread the word that the vision is real. Moreover, they can be potential
advisory board candidates.
Build a Minimum Viable Product 
(MVP)
 First
The idea that a startup builds its product for a small group of initial customers
rather than devising a generic mainstream spec is radical. What follows is
equally revolutionary.
The goal of the MVP is to build the smallest possible
feature set.
 
On the day the company starts, there is very limited customer input. All
the startup has is a vision of what the problem, product and solution seem to
be. Unfortunately, it’s either a vision or a hallucination. The company doesn’t
know who its initial customers are or what features they’ll want. One option
is to start developing an entire full-featured first release of the product, with
every feature the founders can think of. We now know this results in wasted
engineering effort, time and cash, as customers don’t use, want or need most
of the features developed without their input.
Another path is to put Product Development on hold until the Customer
Development team can find customers who can provide adequate feedback.
The risk here is lost time and no product for customers to provide feedback
against. A third, more productive approach is to develop the core features of
the product (incrementally and iteratively with agile engineering methods),
with the feature list driven by the vision and experience of the company’s
founders. 
This is a minimum viable product.
The goal of customer discovery is to test your understanding of the
customer’s problem and see if your proposed solution will prompt him to use
or buy the product based on its most important features alone. Most users
want finished products, but earlyvangelists are the perfect target for the MVP.
Tailor the initial product release to satisfy their needs. If no one thinks your
MVP solution is interesting or sufficient, iterate or pivot until an adequate
number say “yes.”
The shift in thinking to an incremental and iterative MVP as opposed to
a fully featured first product release is important. Engineers tend to make a
product bigger and more perfect. The MVP helps them focus the most
important and indispensable features. Your goal in having an MVP is not to
gather feature requests to change the product or to make the feature set larger.
Instead, the goal is to put the MVP in front of customers to find out whether
you understood the customer problem well enough to define key elements of
the solution. Then you iteratively refine the solution. If, and only if, no
customers can be found for the most important features of the MVP, bring
customers’ additional feature requests to the product development team. In
the Customer Development model, feature requests to an MVP are by
exception and iteration rather than by rule. This eliminates the endless list of
feature requests that often delay first customer ship and drive product
development teams crazy.
 MVPs for Web/Mobile Are Different
Web/mobile businesses conduct customer discovery differently from those in
the physical channel. They can reach hundreds or thousands more customers
by combining online and face-to-face interactions. They place a greater
emphasis on customer acquisition, activation, and referrals. Web/mobile
minimum viable products can be developed faster and delivered earlier,
accelerating the discovery process. When delivered, they can conduct more
tests with customers, with more granular customer-response data. This results
in a faster iteration of the problem statement, the proposed solution, and the
MVP itself.
Use the Business Model Canvas as The Customer
Discovery Scorecard
Often there’s a lack of a shared and clear understanding of the business
model throughout the company. This customer discovery step uses Alexander
Osterwalder’s 
business model canvas
 to diagrammatically illustrate how a
company intends to make money. As shown in 
Figure 4.2
 the canvas
represents any company in nine boxes, depicting the details of a company’s
product, customers, channels, demand creation, revenue models, partners,
resources, activities and cost structure. (We described the business model
canvas in detail in the 
Customer Development Manifesto
.)
Business Model Canvas
 (Figure 4.2)
In this phase you’ll develop a one- or two-page brief about each of the
following boxes in the business model canvas:
Market Size: how big the opportunity is
Value Proposition, Part 1: the product/service, its benefits and minimum
viable product
Customer Segments: who the customer is and what problems the
product solves
Channels: how the product will be distributed and sold
Customer Relationships: how demand will be created
Value Proposition, Part 2: market-type hypothesis and competitive set/
differentiation
Key Resources: suppliers, commodities, or other essential elements of
the business
Key Partners: other enterprises essential to success of the business
Revenue Streams: revenue and profit sources and size
When you first draft your initial hypotheses your canvas begins to fill
up, looking like 
Figure 4.3
.
Sample Business Model Canvas—Initial Hypotheses
 (Figure 4.3)
But in addition to using the business model canvas as a static snapshot
of the business at a single moment, frozen in time, Customer Development
uses the canvas as a “scorecard” to track progress in searching for a business
model.
Once a week update the canvas to reflect any pivots or iterations,
highlighting in red the changes from the last week.
Then after you and your team agree on the changes to your business
model, integrate them into what becomes your new canvas for the week (the
accepted changes in red are then shown in black). During the next week any
new changes are again shown in red. Then the process repeats each week –
new changes showing up in red. Then a new canvas used for the week.
This method highlights the changes over time for your and the team’s
reference. 
Figure 4.4
 shows how the canvases will look over time.
Using the Business Model Canvas as a Weekly Scorecard
 (Figure 4.4)
Had they read this book, and gotten out of the building, the folks at
Iridium might have saved billions by learning just how small the market for
their business had become. It would have allowed them to search for
alternatives and survival.
To sum up the customer discovery philosophy:
 whether there’s
product/market fit by finding earlyvangelists, understanding their needs, and
verifying that the initial minimum viable product solves a problem they’ll
eagerly pay to have solved. And if not, use near-continuous customer
feedback to drive agile, frequent changes in product and business model
alike.
As you complete the hypothesis development, your business model
canvas quickly becomes multi-dimensional. You are really developing three
initial canvases:
Core elements of the business model itself (value proposition, channel,
etc.)
Hypotheses you have for each element of the business model (such as
“people will want these features, “or “customers will buy our product
because...”)
And a layer outlining the key pass/fail tests you will use to get face-to-
face with customers and use their feedback to convert your hypotheses
into facts.
Overview of Customer Discovery
Customer Discovery: Overview of the Process
 (Figure 4.5)
Customer Discovery has Four Phases
Phase 1
 deconstructs the founders’ vision into the nine parts of the business
model canvas (product, customers, channels, demand creation, revenue
models, partners, resources, activities and cost structure). Then your team
writes one-page briefs about each of the hypotheses, including the list of
experiments or tests you’ll need to conduct to prove or disprove each one.
In Phase 2
 you conduct experiments to test your “problem” hypotheses. This
helps you understand how important the problem is and how big it can
become. You do so by testing most elements of the business model, including
the value proposition, pricing, channel strategy, and sales process. Your goal
is to turn hypotheses into facts or discard them if they’re wrong, and replace
them with new hypotheses. In the process, you’ll gain a deep understanding
of customers’ business, workflow, organization, and product needs. When all
the facts are in, update your results on the canvas.
 Web-based products and channels often implement much of Phase 2
online in near-real time.
In Phase 3
, you test your “solution,” presenting your value proposition
(product, pricing, features, and other business model components) and the
minimum viable product to customers and compare their responses to the
“pass/fail” goals you developed earlier. 
 For a web-based product, the
MVP is a live site, a live demo, or a feature or piece of functionality or
content.
 The goal is not to sell the product, but to validate how well you
understood the problem in Phase 2 when you heard customers say, “Even
these minimum features solve our problems,” or, “I need this product.”
Ideally, customers ask, “When can I get it?”
 Online, customers should engage and interact, spend time on it or
with it, appear in droves, come back again and again, and bring their friends.
In Phase 4
 you stop and assess the results of the experiments you’ve
conducted and verify that you have:
a full understanding of customers’ problems, passions, or needs
confirmed the value proposition solves problems, passions or needs
determined that a sizable volume of customers exists for the product
learned what customers will pay for the product
made certain the resulting revenue should deliver a profitable business
With your product features and business model validated, decide
whether you have learned enough to go out and try to sell a select your
product to a few visionary customers, or whether you need to go back to
customers to learn some more. If, and only if, you are successful in this step
do you proceed to customer validation.
That’s customer discovery in a nutshell. The remainder of this section
details each of the phases just described.
Now let’s get started.
Overview of the Customer Validation Process


CHAPTER 5
Introduction to Customer Validation
Along the journey we commonly forget its goal.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
E
.PIPHANY’S
 
FOUNDING HYPOTHESES WERE
 typically pretty straightforward
and “investable” in the mid-1990s, when software companies were
automating everything from accounts payable to network security, sales force
processes and even wine-cellar inventories. “Why not automate the marketing
department?” asked the founders, meeting in their modest living room. “After
all, most of the tasks like press releases and data sheets and customer letters
are repeatable processes.” Venture capital was raised and the company began
to build its product based on the founders’ vision.
However, the company’s initial idea of who the customer was and the
problem they wanted to solve was just plain wrong. The company’s later
success was due to the four passionate entrepreneurs’ willingness to listen to
customers and to the three painful pivots driven by customer feedback.
The Browser Breakthrough
During the ’90s, large corporations acquired different software applications to
automate each part of their enterprise—finance, customer support,
manufacturing, and sales among them. But the data these applications
collected were accessed via reporting tools from the IT organization. More
important, the data existed in “virtual silos,” with each functional system
walled off from the other. The finance system didn’t talk to the sales system,
which didn’t know that the manufacturing system even existed. Queries like
“Compare the sales data of green dresses versus blue ones with current
inventory for each by store, and contrast the gross margin by region to
calculate discounts” were virtually impossible to answer to because they
required combining data from three incompatible applications. As a result, it
could often take days or even weeks to get a simple inventory-detail report.
E.piphany’s then-radical notion was to provide managers
anytime/anywhere drill-downs and analysis in real time, without IT, through
a revolutionary new technology called a web browser. One of the company’s
key hypotheses was that the product should be a great fit for companies with
lots of customers, tons of data on each one, and a recurring need for fast new
data-driven, microsegmented marketing campaigns.
An Epiphany at E.piphany
Early on, E.piphany assembled an advisory board. A key adviser was the VP
of database marketing at Schwab. She was incredibly generous with her time
and said the system might work in their application. She introduced the
company to five other database marketing executives, who essentially said,
“If you get a system working at Schwab, we’ll have to buy one as well.” You
couldn’t get much better than that. E.piphany had found its first
earlyvangelist and first market.
But each time Schwab’s people looked at the system’s technical details,
they politely said our product was missing a key feature for database
marketing. It took two meetings before the founders realized they understood
her problem, all right, but the solution—the underlying database schema of
the software—was missing the most important feature for solving it. It didn’t
include “householding,” and without this feature, she could never buy the
E.piphany system. (Householding, well-known among database marketers,
recognizes that two or more people at the same physical address live together
and, in Schwab’s case, often invest together. This feature was crucial to
direct-marketers who didn’t want to send multiple or differing ads to the
same address.) And no amount of sales and marketing hand-waving was
going to fix the problem.
It was a major mistake. Until this meeting, the founders hadn’t
understood the customer problem well enough to provide the correct solution.
E.piphany’s co-founders, Ben Wegbreit and Steve Blank, joined the
Schwab VP, and her engineering team in a deep technical discussion of what
the software needed to do for Schwab’s business and what was needed. Ben
asked five or 10 questions, everybody nodded and the meeting ended. On the
long ride back to E.piphany’s living-room office, Steve asked, “Ben, how do
we solve Schwab’s problem?”
After a moment of silence, he replied, “Show them page 6 of our
product spec.”
“What do you mean page 6? Our spec only has five pages!”
Ben looked at Steve and smiled. “Not anymore.”
They had just pivoted the product and refined the minimum feature set.
E.piphany’s first order from Schwab came the week after they demo’ed
householding. Other orders followed soon after. A week later, the founders
sat down to figure out what other feature they would toss out to make room
for this one.
E.piphany would go through two additional equally painful pivots
before its initial public offering, but that “householding” pivot sold the
founders on the “power of the pivot” value.
The meeting and car ride from Schwab to the company headquarters
illustrates the customer validation process every startup needs: a method for
validating the business model with real customers and orders.
Customer validation turns hypotheses into facts about basic questions
like:
     •   Do we understand the sales/user acquisition process?
          
   Is it repeatable?
          
   Can we prove it’s repeatable? (If our business model is single-sided
commerce, the only acceptable proof is enough full-price orders.)
          
   Can we get these orders/users with the current product?
     •   Have we tested sales and distribution channels?
     •   Are we confident we can scale orders/users into a profitable business?
     •   Have we correctly positioned the product and the company?
The Customer Validation Philosophy
Customer validation attempts to “test sell” at every stage. It runs a continuing
series of quantitative pass/fail tests to 
determine whether there’s strong
enough product/market fit to justify scaling sales and marketing spending.
Most of your testing effort will be asking people to give you an order or
engage with your app or website. At this point, you’re testing the entire
business model, not its individual components, even as you learn more details
about some, like price or channel.
Just as customer discovery was disorienting for experienced marketers,
the customer validation process turns the world upside down for experienced
salespeople and, in particular, those with sales responsibility. All the rules
sales executives learned while selling in physical channels at large companies
are 
not
 applicable to startups. In fact, they’re positively detrimental. It’s not
all about the launch party!
In the customer validation step, 
you are not going to hire and staff a
sales team.
 You are not going to execute to a sales plan or “the sales
strategy.” The reality is 
that you don’t know enough yet to do any of these
things. At the end of customer discovery, you have in hand firm hypotheses
about who will buy, why they will buy, and at what price they will buy. But
until those hypotheses are validated—with customer orders—they’re all little
more than educated guesses, even with the work invested to develop them.
From Business Model Canvas to the Sales Roadmap
In customer discovery you tested some of the hypotheses of your business
model:
Value proposition:
 You affirmed it with a few dozen to a few hundred
people
Customer segments:
 You have a hypothesis about customer archetypes
Customer relationships:
 You tested several “get, keep and grow”
activities
Channel:
 You understand your key channel partners, and some have
expressed interest
Revenue model:
 The company has an idea of how to price its offering
A sales roadmap uses all you’ve learned from customer discovery to
guide the creation of a sales funnel specifically for your company. It answers:
Who influences a sale? Who recommends a sale?
Who is the decision-maker? Who is the economic buyer? The saboteur?
Where is the budget for purchasing the type of product you’re selling?
How many sales calls are needed to make one sale?
How long does an average sale take from beginning to end?
What is the selling strategy? Is this a solution sale?
If so, what are “key customer problems?”
What’s the profile of optimal visionary buyers, the earlyvangelists every
startup needs?
     
 Where will the traffic come from? Will it stick?
     
 Will the product be strong enough to grow virally?
Unless a company has proven answers to these questions, few sales will
happen, and those that do occur will result from heroic single-shot efforts. Of
course, on some level, most sales VPs realize they lack the knowledge they
need to draw a detailed sales roadmap, but most believe they and their newly
hired sales team can acquire this information while simultaneously selling
and closing orders. This is because most executives new to startups confuse
searching for a business model with the execution of a known business model.
A sales roadmap is part of the 
search
 for a business model. Only after it’s
built can it be executed. Startups can’t learn and discover while they’re busy
executing. As we can see from the rubble of any number of failed startups,
attempting to execute before you have a sales roadmap in place is pure folly.
Building a Sales Roadmap Versus Building a Sales
Force
Given how critical the validation step is, a CEO’s first instinct is to speed up
the process by spending more on customer acquisition or adding salespeople.
The reality is, this doesn’t speed up the validation phase. In fact, it most often
slows it down. Instead, you’ll build a roadmap to figure out how to get
repeatable sales (by explicitly testing product/ market fit). Once that’s done,
then
 build a sales organization.
Developing a sales roadmap is part of the search for
a business model.
 
In an existing market, customer validation may simply validate that the
sales VP’s rolodex or contact list is relevant, and that product performance
metrics the company identified in customer discovery were correct. In a re-
segmented, clone or new market, even a rolodex of infinite size (or tripling
the AdWords budget) won’t substitute for a proven business model and a
tested sales roadmap.
For an experienced sales or business development executive, these
statements about customer validation are heretical. All the actions in
Customer Development we consider to be mistakes are what traditional sales
professionals have been 
trained to do. It seems counterintuitive and
disorienting. So let’s look more closely at why the first sales in a startup are
so different from later-stage sales or selling in a large company.
Founders Must Lead the Customer Validation
Team
Founders who complete customer discovery often mistakenly ease up and
delegate customer validation activities to Sales, Business Development,
Marketing or Product Management. This is a bad idea. Middle and junior
managers aren’t likely to be good at customer validation, which requires
creative searching, probing, and turning on a dime—not execution of a
repeatable process.
Why must the founders lead? First, founders and only founders call the
shots on pivoting. To do so, they must hear about flaws in the product or
business model 
directly from the customers.
 Nothing else has the same
impact. Anyone other than a founder who learns of a serious product or
business-plan flaw faces two challenges: he or she doesn’t have the authority
to pivot, and he or she seldom has the courage to report bad customer
feedback to the founder.
 In web/mobile channels, where there’s much more feedback to
process, the founders still make the call about pivots, but the company needs
to have data junkies, A/B testers, statisticians, and SEO/PPC experts, as well
as at least one or two wildly creative online marketers. (This might be
physically embodied in the founder and one or two amazing people.) This
team will measure, assess, manage and improve the acquisition, or Get
Customers, funnel. As they’re getting “out of the building” digitally, a
customer development team also leaves physically for face-to-face customer
validation, and for deal-making that drives traffic or referrals.
Validation Proceeds at Different Speeds in Different
Channels
It takes far more time to set up visits in a physical channel with prospects in
cellphone companies in Asia and Africa than to get customer feedback
electronically for a website. And more customers can be reached via
web/mobile channels than can ever be met face-to-face.
 Customer validation for web/mobile startups always proceeds faster
with many more iterations than it does with physical channels and goods.
Why? It’s all bits that can be changed. Regardless of speed, the fundamental
principles of customer validation are identical across all channels.
Make Early Sales to 
Earlyvangelists
In customer validation you will target Earlyvangelists as your first paying
customers. (If you can’t sell to them, it doesn’t get better over time.)
Constrain Spending in Customer Validation
A typical failure scenario for startups is 
premature scaling
, when there are
more salespeople in the field burning cash than are needed while your
business model is still unproven. Or running expensive demand-creation
activities before you’re sure who your customers really are. Too often those
sales people are fired and their marketing programs killed when the startup
faces a major pivot after scaling too early. Customer validation delays sales-
and-marketing hiring and spending until validation is nearly complete. This
constraint is central to the process, which assumes startups will fail and
iterate often. The spending constraint keeps enough cash in the bank to fund
multiple pivots on the road to success.
Prioritize What Needs to be Validated
Prioritizing the business model elements that need validating is essential at
the start of customer validation. Every startup business model has a zillion
moving parts. Validation can’t possibly measure and affirm every variable or
the founders will be 100 years old by the time they’re ready to scale—or,
worse, exit—the business.
The business model canvas is an excellent guide here. Most startups will
focus on the four core elements: value proposition, customer relationships,
channel, and revenue model. This list works for many businesses but not all.
Multi-sided markets need to prioritize all sides of the market. Think about the
five or fewer things that will make this a huge, successful business—or not.
Why Accountants Don’t Run Startups
With all the process steps involved, it’s sometimes hard to remember that the
Customer Development process isn’t a giant focus group. The goal is not to
add up all the customer feedback and vote on what features to implement.
Founders who are artists at heart run startups—the true purpose of Customer
Development is to 
inform their vision.
 (In a new market, there’s no data at
all!) A great entrepreneur may consider all the customer data, listen to his
instincts and say, “Here’s why I’m going to ignore what we just heard.”
 And Finally: Don’t Be Afraid to Let Go When
Lightning Strikes
Occasionally, fast-scaling web/mobile startups with viral or network-effect
drivers find the business suddenly blasting off, even if this book doesn’t
suggest that it should happen yet. This occurred at Google, YouTube,
Facebook, and Twitter, to name an elite few. If you’re lucky enough to hit a
consumer nerve as hard as they did, put this book down and hold on to the
rocket ship. After all, that’s what entrepreneurs do! (Skim the book another
time on your private jet or yacht or Sunfish.)
The Customer Validation Philosophy, in Summary
Customer discovery first tested your hypotheses about the company’s
business model with a relatively tiny group of customers who were asked for
opinions, not orders. Discovery itself didn’t deliver any proven, hard facts
about who would buy or how scalable the business was.
Customer validation goes to the next step and 
determines whether a
product/market fit can be validated by orders or usage.
 It does so by further
developing the MVP as well as the company’s sales and marketing plans and
materials. Then it gets founders out of the building (physically, virtually, or
both) to test the MVP and every other key business model hypotheses,
including product features, pricing, channel, and positioning. How? By
asking for orders (or downloads, logons, or clicks)!
Test the MVP. How? By asking for orders.
 
Customer validation is complete when the company has answers to these
three questions:
1
. 
Can the business scale?
 Will a dollar spent on customer acquisition
yield more than a dollar’s worth of incremental revenue, page views,
downloads or clicks?
2
. 
Is there a repeatable and scalable sales roadmap?
 Does the company
know the right prospects to call on or acquire, and what to say to them to
consistently deliver sales?
3
. 
Is the sales funnel predictable?
 Do the same sales programs and tactics
consistently deliver an adequate, profitable flow of customers through
the funnel?
Now let’s get started.
Overview of the Customer Validation Process
Customer Validation: Overview of the Process
 (Figure 5.1)
Customer Validation has Four Phases
Phase 1
 consists of six “get ready to sell” activities; product positioning,
sales/ marketing materials for “test selling” efforts, the hiring of a sales
closer, the creation of a distribution channel plan, refining a sales roadmap,
and creating an advisory board. These activities make your team the best
prepared early stage venture ever to hit the streets.
 Companies in web/mobile channels also have six “get ready to sell”
activities: Product Positioning, assembling Acquire/Activate Plans, building
the high-fidelity MVP, building the metrics toolset, hiring a “data chief” and
creating an advisory board. They help deliver lean, cost-effective customer
acquisition programs.
Phase 2
 gets founders out of the building to put the product to the ultimate
test: will customers validate your business model by buying your product?
You’ll attempt to actually sell customers an unfinished and unproven product
without a professional sales organization. Getting feedback is as important as
getting orders. Startups in the physical channel do this with brochures,
PowerPoints, sales materials and, where possible, product demos or mockups.
Dozens if not hundreds of meetings help refine the product presentation and
channel plans, validate the sales roadmap, prove the predictability of the sales
funnel, and validate that the business model is repeatable, scalable and
profitable in a real-world test.
 Web/mobile startups “go live” and get out of the building virtually to
see if their plans and tools to acquire customers actually attract customers
who activate or buy. Do more than a handful of real customers behave as the
hypotheses suggest they will? Acquisition and activation activities are
measured and optimized.
Startups in multi-sided markets (physical or web/mobile) need to get out
of the building to test each side of the market. Web/Mobile marketers first
test users and then validate a different set of hypotheses (value proposition,
segment, revenue model, etc.) with the “payers,” who are marketers or
advertisers willing to pay to reach people using the site for free.
Phase 3
 happens once you have a couple of orders under your belt and
enough customer information to develop and refine your product and
company positioning. The positioning is tested in meetings with industry
pundits and analysts and face-to-face with the expanded customer audience.
 Web/mobile startups refine their “Get” program tactics. Then they
conduct initial product positioning, next they gather and organize the
customer behavior data collected in Phase 2: customer responses to “Get”
activities and metrics summarizing their initial on-site behavior. They collect
feedback about the MVP itself and the effectiveness of acquisition tools.
Phase 4
 stops all activity for long enough to conduct a detailed pivot-or-
proceed analysis and verify that, regardless of channel, customer validation is
complete and the company knows how to scale. If so, it’s ready to reap the
rewards for founders and investors alike. But first there are lots of tough
questions and hard work to verify.
In sum, the question is simple: “is this a business worth doing,” and
devoting several years of backbreaking work? Will it generate enough
revenue, growth and profits to achieve the founders’ and investors’ goals?
And has the team learned enough to make it happen?
Odds are overwhelming that the optimum business model won’t be
found on the first or second try in validation.
The moment customer validation is over is when it’s clear that there are
real orders, users, or clicks—not surveys or chats. Customer validation
confirms that customers will accept the minimum viable product, proves that
the customers exist, figures out how to reach them predictably, and crafts a
scalable plan to engage and sell many more. It’s often called the “epiphany
moment.”

CHAPTER 6
Customer Validation: The Toughest
Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
T
HIS IS THE MOST CRITICAL, MOST GUT-WRENCHING
 phase of customer
validation: honestly determining whether there’s a scalable, profitable
business model ahead. Is the company ready to go forward to the customer
creation step, when millions of dollars are often spent to fuel rapid customer
growth? This step literally “calls the question” about the company’s future
directions. It’s time to study all the test results, all the customer learning and
all the insights you’ve had from the facts you’ve gathered. Its time to see if
the company is ready to start spending money to scale, and that the result will
be a great, profitable company.
There are three steps to answering the crucial “pivot or proceed” question:
Assemble and review all key discovery and validation findings
Review the business model hypotheses and their interactions with one
another
Focus on the “metrics that matter” in the financial model
Pivot or Proceed: Assemble Data Findings
By this point, the team has assembled a massive amount of hard data:
industry research, customer segments, customer feedback, marketing
program results, channel and cost input and much more. The data needs to be
verified, with any gaps, discrepancies, or anomalies filled in along the way. A
few examples:
The company needs 10,000 customers in order to be profitable, but the
market isn’t that large
Customer acquisition or channel costs are too high, rendering the
company unprofitable
The sales roadmap is too long and complex, making the cost of sales
way too high
Despite best efforts, referrals just aren’t delivering additional customers
These anomalies are relatively easy to spot when all the data is collected
in one room. They often call for further customer, channel, or product
development discussions. At times, they drive a business model pivot.
The best way to “translate” piles of data, is to make
it as visual as possible.
 
Build a War Room
The best way to “translate” piles of data, reports and questionnaires is to
make it as visual as possible. For best results, lock the founding team in a
room for a day or two to walk step by step through each hypothesis. Cover
one wall with a blown up “final” business model canvas. Cover the other wall
with the hypotheses themselves, sorted to keep the pieces of each hypothesis
together (remember, many hypotheses have multiple parts). Use another wall
for supporting diagrams, and allow space for 
the most recent canvas and
perhaps one or two earlier iterations. Leave a large whiteboard available for
keeping score of questions and changes and for the key “metrics that matter”
numbers that emerge (discussed in detail in Step 3). While not every diagram
is appropriate for your startup, review:
a 
work-flow map
 of the prototypical customer that diagrams how
customers do their jobs or live their lives both with and without the new
product
an 
organizational/influence map
 showing whom consumers or
businesspeople interact with, how often, and how those people influence
buying decisions.
customer archetypes:
 how they earn and spend their money and use their
time
a market map
 showing where your customers will come from
a channel or sales roadmap
 diagramming how sales will happen
a fully updated business model canvas
 (along with a few earlier
versions)
Review the Data
The most important hard data to review includes:
customer feedback, particularly from sales report cards evaluating
customer enthusiasm for the product and its potential sales revenue over
time
market size and market share estimates
channel feedback and revenue potential summaries
pricing, customer acquisition costs, and any major product cost changes
detailed information about the industry, the customers, and their
behavior
competitive product and pricing information
results of your web “get, keep and grow” tests
details of your customer acquisition costs and viral coefficient and the
latest stats on page views per visit, visit frequency, user growth, and
retention optimization
user-testing results, showing the rate of improvement for activation,
conversion, retention and growth activities
The team, often including investors, should review all the materials to
ensure that all the learning from discovery and validation has been integrated
into the latest versions of the hypothesis documents and into an updated
version of the business model canvas that will be discussed in the next step.
The key activity at this stage is to look at the intersections of, or interactions
among, the business model components, since no doubt many components
have changed along the way. The process is a healthy one, and the results
fuel the next steps of the pivot-or-proceed process.
Look at the intersections of, or interactions among
the business model components.
 
The Business Model Checklist (
Figure 6.2
) gives you and your
management team the questions you should be asking and worrying about.
Print them out. Keep them handy. And worry “Am I going to bet my
company that I got them right?”
Pivot or Proceed: Validate Your Business Model
It’s been a long road but you’ve converted most of your business model
hypotheses from customer discovery into facts. You’ve done so by extensive
testing through face-to-face customer interactions. So, if the customer-
relationships hypothesis said one of every five acquired customers will
activate and pay for the service or app, this actually happened in validation,
with hundreds if not thousands of customers. Or you’ve proven that people
return to the product or app three times a week for an average of 20 minutes
per visit or spend $100 a month visiting once.
Review Business Model Hypotheses
 (Figure 6.1)
The team should assemble data collected in the last phase in its “war
room” use the checklist to walk through the business model hypotheses, box
by box, and ascertain that there are factual, definitive answers to at least
every question on the checklist.
In this final phase of customer validation the company asks itself the
same questions it asked in Phase 4 of customer discovery. But at this point, it
should have much more quantitative, irrefutable proof of the answers, since
you’ve spoken to far more customers and conducted many more tests.
 Web/mobile startups have a unique set of business model hypotheses
that they need to validate, particularly in the “Get/Keep/Grow” Customer
Relationships area. These questions include:
Has the company proven it can acquire and activate a steadily-increasing
number of customers at a cost in line with the cost structure?
Are the customers being acquired demonstrating that they will spend
and “stick” with the company at rates that will deliver the revenue plan?
And are customers referring other good quality customers in sufficient
numbers to deliver these often-free new customers, reducing the average
acquisition cost?
In multi-sided markets, are customers visiting often enough,
participating actively enough, and staying active long enough to help the
company generate the revenues it needs to succeed?
The Business Model Canvas as a Scorecard
Hopefully you’ve been taking regular snapshots of your business model
canvas – either week-by-week snapshots, or at least at each major pivot. If
you’ve done it this way you now essentially have a film strip of the
entrepreneurial process.
As you can see from 
Figure 6.1
, each stage of discovery and validation
refined the canvas. Experiments were run, learning caused iterations and a
few pivots, and all were documented in a new canvas (reread 
here
).
Now that you have your canvases up on the wall use them as a point of
discussion.
The answers to “Is this a business?” can be found in
the results of the multitude of tests you’ve
conducted throughout the validation process.
 
The answers to “Is this a business?” can be found in the results of the
multitude of tests you’ve conducted throughout the validation process. As is
often the case, when the results aren’t convincing enough, or when they don’t
deliver the traffic or financial targets of the business model, it’s time to iterate
or pivot, and retest to see if the new approach improves the results. After all,
the company will very shortly be spending millions of dollars in the customer
creation phase, where results are expected to be far more predictable, and
much more is at risk. While this may seem ambitious and unreasonable, the
closer a company is to this “fact-based plan,” the greater its chances for
business and fund-raising success.

Business Model Checklist
 (Figure 6.2)
Pivot or Proceed: Validate the Financial Model
This step answers one key question: do all the tests point to a scalable, sizable
business? And can it happen before the company runs out of money?
In this step, you’ll figure out whether you have a potentially thriving
business, a hobby, or a tax loss.
Answering the question doesn’t require pounds of Excel spreadsheets or
50-item budgets. It relies more on the facts you’ve developed by testing your
original hypotheses with the only people who have the answers, your
customers, and with a short list of numbers, the 
metrics that matter
.
A mere handful of numbers define the difference
between a scalable, profitable business and a
failure.
 
A mere handful of numbers define the difference between a scalable,
profitable business and a failure. Successful entrepreneurs will be able to
recite, adjust, and recompute this handful or so of key numbers about
customers, product costs, and revenue growth while they sleep. Meanwhile,
they’re always focused on the two metrics that matter most: how many
months’ worth of cash remain in the bank? And how fast are we burning
through what’s left?
We guarantee that this different approach to finance will get you thrown
out of just about every business school in the country, but it’s all that’s
needed at this stage to determine whether your business model passes the
validation test and is ready to move on from validation to scale in customer
creation.
Metrics that Matter
Since page 1 of this book you’ve been using the business model canvas to
organize your testing. In this section we’re going to use the canvas to
organize your financial model. This is a radically different approach
compared to more typical use of 5-year revenue forecast spreadsheets. Think
of it as bringing your “report card” home to Mom and Dad—hopefully, a
report card full of A’s and A+’s, since B and C responses do not a great
company make. Some elements of the business model represent revenue or
costs, while others fuel growth. Physical and web/mobile channel costs vary
widely, as do rates of sale and growth, so one last time we’ll examine the
metrics three different ways:
In a physical channel, less than a dozen numbers usually tell the entire story:
Value proposition:
 What are product cost, market size, attainable market
share, and customer impact of network effects?
Customer Relationships:
 What are customer acquisition costs, prospect
conversion rates, customer lifetime value, and customer switching costs
that the company may have to pay?
Market Type:
 As discussed in 
Chapter 3
, different market types drive
different revenue curves to consider in longer-term revenue predictions
Cost Structure:
 What are the basic operating costs of the business?
Channel:
 What are the costs of selling through the channel? Channel
margin, promotion, shelf-space charges?
Revenue Streams:
 What are the average selling price, total achievable
revenue, and number of customers a year?
Burn Rate
 (derived from the above): How much cash is the company
“burning” (spending) a month? When will the company run out of cash?
There’s no precise formula for what a burn rate should be, but since it’s
the issue over which boards most often fire their founders, the founders
and investors must agree on what the burn rate should be and how many
more pivots the startup can afford in its search for the scalable,
profitable business model
 In the web/mobile channel, less than a dozen numbers tell the entire
story:
Value proposition:
 What is the estimated per-user cost of a user, and are
there any incremental costs when one’s added. Estimate the market size,
attainable market share, and the customer impact of referrals or network
effects
Customer Relationships:
 What are customer acquisition costs, prospect
conversion and retention rates, and how many new customers or users
will your current customers get you virally, for free?
Market Type:
 As discussed in 
Chapter 3
, different market types drive
different revenue curves to consider in longer-term revenue predictions
Cost Structure:
 What are the basic operating costs of the business? (Be
sure not to mingle or double-count these costs with your value
proposition costs)
Channel:
 What are the costs of selling through the channel: payments to
app stores, marketplace sites like 
Amazon.com
, or related sites referring
customers to you?
Revenue Streams:
 What are the average selling price, total achievable
revenue, and number of customers a year, and how long or how often
will customers spend?
Burn Rate
 (derived from the above): How much cash is the company
“burning” (spending) a month? When will the company run out of cash?
A Few Words about Burn Rate
Venture capitalist Fred Wilson suggests some burn-rate guidelines for
venture funded web/mobile businesses that may be helpful to entrepreneurs
of all stripes. Wilson’s advice looks at burn rate based on the company’s
growth stage.
Customer discovery,
 which he calls the “building product” stage, should
keep the burn rate between $50,000 and $75,000 a month, which should
fund a team of three or four engineers building the MVP as well as the
founding team, rent, operating costs and the like
Customer validation,
 Wilson’s “building usage” stage, shouldn’t exceed
a burn rate of $100,000 a month. This stage begins when product/market
fit is achieved and fuels the “get customers” and MVP iteration
discussed in this chapter
Customer creation,
 Wilson’s “building the business” stage, should
ideally hold the burn rate to $250,000 a month as the company builds a
team, expands marketing activities, and starts generating material
revenues
These are guidelines, and there are zillions of exceptions.
Assemble all your test results to provide a forecast for the coming year,
which begins on Day One of Step 3 of Customer Development, the customer
creation process.
We doubt there have been many startups where the year-one financial
results of customer creation matched the “metrics that matter.” But any VC,
uncle or rich neighbor is going to want to know why you think an investment
in your startup will deliver startup-size returns. If at the end of this step the
numbers are ugly—yup, you guessed it—turn back to the beginning of
discovery, or at least customer validation, and start revising and retesting
your hypotheses.
Three things to consider before you dive into Metrics That Matter:
Use the time frames that make the most sense for your startup.
Generally, the longer the physical-channel sales cycle (think enterprise
software), the longer the “space” between calculations should be. Here
we used a quarter-by-quarter forecast
An analysis like this can—and should—often stop the pivot–or-proceed
process in its tracks if the computation forecasts that the company will
either run out of money within the year or won’t be able to raise enough
funds to survive the first year of customer creation
Don’t be in a hurry at this critical step. As an entrepreneur, if you take a
pile of money to move forward here and fail, it will at least cost you a
significant portion of your founders’ equity, and it will often cost you
your job
Metrics that Matter Scenarios
Metrics matters are a radically new approach to startup math. They’re best
illustrated with a series of examples. The three spreadsheet scenarios on the
next pages illustrate how you can use “Metrics that Matter” to evaluate your
business. The three examples are:
a physical product sold in a physical channel
a web/mobile product sold in the web/mobile channel
and a multisided web/mobile market
Metrics that Matter: Example 1
“EZ Gardener” in a Physical Channel
Let’s take a look at Table 6.1 what the metrics that matter for a physical
channel would look like in spreadsheet form.
Here’s a simple example of a rough quarter-by-quarter cash-burn
computation for our hypothetical $30 (suggested retail) EZ Gardener all-in-
one gardening-tool set, sold in garden stores and by mass merchants. Our
timing is the coming year. (The spreadsheet starts Day One of the customer
creation process.)
“Metrics That Matter”: Physical Channel Model
 (Table 6.1)
Note: the leftmost numbers refer to commentary in descriptive text that
follows.
A few things about the hypothetical business factored into the numbers
above:
This “friends and family” funded venture begins customer creation with
$500,000 in the bank. Like most physical-channel marketers, EZ
Gardener also promotes online. But they read this book, followed
directions, and are “getting the most important channel right first,” so
they’re not selling product online yet
In year two, as the product’s newness wears off, the price drops.
Product development was completed earlier offshore, so there are no
more development costs until we see how this product sells
Revenue never scales dramatically, since the market type is “re-
segmenting/niche market”
What Metrics Matter?
There are 11 metrics that matter in this spreadsheet. Following the left-hand
column of the spreadsheet, let’s explore the origin of each number as well as
its source a little more closely:
1.
   Total number of units sold:
 This number is estimated (ideally by
quarter) from customer validation report cards used with buyers and
channel partners. Compare these numbers with your estimates of total
addressable (or if known, serviceable) market and your market share
estimates. Use the two sets of numbers to estimate the number of units to
be sold in each quarter. If customers make multiple purchases within a
year, factor it in.
2.
   Average retail selling price:
 How much the consumer will pay, on
average, for the product. This number, developed in the value proposition
hypothesis, should be validated in the competitive analysis and
throughout customer and channel validation conversations. It’s shown
here as the price per unit and is often the average selling price, since retail
pricing may vary by channel.
3.
   Gross sales across all channels:
 Total retail-dollar sales for the product
per quarter. Relatively straightforward to compute, since the company is
using only one sales channel. Remember to consider “guaranteed sale”
situations where retailers can return unsold merchandise for full credit.
4.
   (Less) channel discount (40%):
 What percentage of the product’s retail
price will the channel take as its cost of sales? Deduct it from the retail
price and apply it to all channel revenue as computed in No. 3. We’ve
assumed a fairly typical chain-store margin here. This revenue will never
reach the company’s coffers, so deduct it now to get to net company
revenue.
Channels are notorious for charging suppliers for
advertising, promotion, and shelf space.
 
5.
   (Less) other channel costs:
 Channels are notorious for charging
suppliers for advertising, promotion, and even shelf space. There may
also be costs of independent sales reps or brokers who “sell in”
merchandise to the channel. In the first year, the company may want to,
or be forced to, purchase special promotions in order to get shelf space in
an important retail channel. Estimate these costs based on channel-partner
discussions.
6.
   NET COMPANY REVENUE:
 The net channel revenue (No. 6) is the
Gross Sales (No. 3) minus the channel discount (No. 4) and other channel
cost (No.5).
7.
   (Less) sales costs (reps, trade shows):
 How much does it cost the team
to reach the garden product channel cost? In addition to specific customer
acquisition costs, the company will spend money on a sales force, sales
and marketing materials, attendance at trade shows and more. These costs
should be identified in the customer-relationships box and perhaps also in
the cost structure box.
8.
   (Less) product costs:
 What does it cost to build and make the product?
Developed primarily from the value proposition and cost structure boxes,
this is an estimate combining two sets of costs:
     •   in this example the cost of developing the product is fully paid for
     •   the manufacturing cost of the physical product itself
9.
   (Less) current operating costs:
 Compute the costs of “turning on the
lights” at the company every day, which should be a relatively static
number: meager founder salaries, other payroll, rent, equipment, utilities,
legal, and the like. This number usually shifts the least, so worry about it
less than others. The spreadsheet increases it modestly late in the year and
in the second year, as is typical.
10.
  CASH BURN FOR PERIOD:
 Did we make or lose money this quarter?
How much? Start with the net company revenue (No. 6) and subtract all
the costs beneath it, Nos. 7, 8, and 9. The result of that equation is the
“cash burn,” or the reduction in the company’s bank account each quarter.
In the example above, the company is losing money, or “burning cash,”
until the fourth quarter, when customer growth and reduced product-
development costs improve the company’s cash flow quite dramatically.
11.
  CASH REMAINING:
 Start by counting the money in the bank on Day
One of the quarter. Our hypothetical company began its first year of
customer creation with $500,000 in the bank. Reduce it by the quarter’s
cash burn to determine how much will be left at quarter’s end.
If These Were Your Numbers, What’s a Founder to
Do?
This is a “nice little business,” and while it will make a lovely living for its
founders and a nice return for its investors, it’s hardly a scalable business like
the many heroes of Silicon Valley. But even though this company is returning
as much pretax profit in year two as it had in the bank on day one of year one,
it’s basically going nowhere fast. It’s a one-product company, and the only
way it got strong revenue growth was by reducing its retail price—never a
good sign.
Some things the founders and board should really be discussing:
Are there any potential dramatic changes to the business model that can
have significant impact on the company’s future growth prospects?
What about overseas markets? Are they a growth opportunity?
How can the company capitalize on its one modest success. Are they
building a brand enough, and creative enough, to perhaps launch other
products both in and beyond the garden area. They might start with
“EZWeeder” and “EZhoe” first, and perhaps expand to “EZgrass” or
“EZflowers” to take maximum advantage of their brand, credibility and
channel relationships to scale the company broader and faster?
Can they extend beyond the garden, maybe adding “EZcooker” or
“EZcleaner” or “EZcleanup” perhaps? Regardless of the new products,
the company would need to spend some serious product development
dollars and spend heavily on marketing (especially if moving beyond the
garden) with no assurances of further success. (They actually need to
develop a whole new set of hypotheses)
Unless the company invests in new product development, this business
is more of a hobby than a scalable business
Hold these thoughts—and others—for the final section of this phase, the
pivot-or-proceed discussion. Next, look at the second of three business
models for a software product sold in the web and mobile channels.
Metrics that Matter: Example 2
Expense Reporter Sold via Web/mobile Channels
 Let’s take a look at Table 6.2, another $30 retail product, downloadable
XpensePro software, sold through the web/mobile channels only.

“Metrics That Matter”: Web/Mobile Sales Model
 (Table 6.2)
Note: the leftmost numbers refer to commentary in descriptive text that
follows.
In this scenario, our hypothetical company is selling XpensePro only as
a web or mobile app download directly from its website and via app stores.
As in the previous example, things are factored into the numbers above:
Product-development cost is heavy at first and then declines.
Incremental product unit costs are practically zero, since the product is a
download
Revenue never scales dramatically, since the market type is “re-
segmenting/niche market,” but the year-to-year revenue increases are
significant enough to promise downstream success
This angel-funded business starts with $300,000 cash remaining. More
money will be hard to get
What Metrics Matter?
There are five metrics that matter in this spreadsheet:
     •   Revenue comes from three channels
          
   Direct revenue from web sales, net of acquisition cost
          
   Direct mobile sales revenues, after subtracting referral incentives
          
   Revenue from the appstore channel, after subtracting channel fees
and marketing costs
     •   Cash burned or made during the period
     •   Cash remaining at the end of the quarter
Because the business is operating in three distinct channels, each of
which operates differently, it takes 17 different numbers to create the above
five metrics, but the board just needs to focus on five rather than 17. If one’s
ever out of whack or way off budget, drill down into the supporting details
numbers that make that number up: unit sales, gross direct revenue, cost of
customers or sales, and net revenue from the channel.
Following the left-hand column of the spreadsheet, let’s explore the origin of
each number and its source:
Web Sales:
1.
   Direct web unit sales:
 How many web apps are downloaded from the
company’s site. Customers are unlikely to make multiple purchases
within a year.
2.
   Gross direct revenue:
 Multiply the number of units (No. 1) by the
average selling price of $30.
3.
   (Less) customer acquisition cost:
 The cost to make a sale over the web
On average, $6 worth of AdWords, incentives, e-mail and the like to
acquire one customer. Multiply $6 by the number of solid units (No. 1).
4.
   Net web revenue total:
 Subtract the customer acquisition cost (No. 3)
from the gross direct revenue from website sales (No. 2).
5.
   Direct mobile unit sales:
 A few customers will find and download the
app’s mobile version at the company website (most will find it at the app
stores). Calculate the quarterly units using the process described in EZ
Gardner metric #1.
On the surface, this looks like a really lovely
business.
 
6.
   Gross revenue/direct mobile units:
 Multiply the number of mobile units
sold directly to customers (No. 5) by $30, the average selling price.
7.
   (Less) referral incentive:
 The customer-relationships hypothesis
indicates that a third of the company’s direct sales will come from
referrals by happy customers encouraged by a $4 incentive. Take 1/3 of
the directsales web (No. 1) and mobile (No. 5) units and multiply by $4.
8.
   DIRECT mobile revenue total:
 How much cash winds up in the
company’s bank from this channel? Multiply units (No. 5) by
revenue/unit (No. 6) and then subtract the referral incentive (No. 7) to
find the answer.
9.
   CHANNEL app-store sales (units):
 Calculate units using the channel
method outlined in EZ Gardner unit sales #3.
10.
  CHANNEL gross revenue:
 multiply the channel units sold (No. 9) by
the retail price of $30.
11.
  (Less) market/app-store 30% fee:
 Every download sold will cost the
company an app store fee of 30 percent, or $9. Multiply units (No. 9) by
$9.00 and subtract it from channel revenue (No. 10).
12.
  TOTAL NET APPSTORE revenue:
 Subtract the app-store fee (No.
11) from channel revenue (No. 10) to find the amount of cash that will
wind up in the company’s bank from app-store sales.
13.
  TOTAL NET revenue (all channels):
 Add three revenue numbers—
No. 4 (direct web revenue), No. 8 (direct mobile revenue), and No. 12
(net channel revenue)—to compute the company’s net sales.
14.
  (Less) product/product-development costs:
 What does it cost to build
and make the product? Compute your ongoing product development
costs, plus download and bandwidth charges. There’s no physical cost of
the product itself.
15.
  (Less) current operating costs:
 Compute the costs of turning on the
lights at the company every day, as in Example 1, line 9.
16.
  CASH BURN FOR PERIOD:
 Did we make or lose money this quarter?
How much? Follow the process for calculating cash burn outlined in
Spreadsheet 1, line 10.
17.
  CASH REMAINING:
 Follow the process in Spreadsheet 1, No. 11.
If These Were Your Numbers, What’s a Founder to
Do?
On the surface, this looks like a really lovely business. It plans to generate
$746,000 in positive cash flow in its first year of customer creation, and to
roughly triple that cashflow in its second year. But can a business doing $2.5-
million in revenue after four years really make investors and founders happy?
That’s not for us to decide, and the numbers don’t tell us whether they spent
$500,000 and a year—or $5,000,000 and five years—to get to the start of the
spreadsheet, so it’s hard to applaud or bash the outcome.
Seems like the next board meeting should pull out the latest business
model canvas and look for some game-changing growth opportunities, almost
no matter what. The company isn’t spending all that much money on product
development or staff costs (those numbers are relatively flat), and it’s almost
turning into a cash cow long before it should be turned out to pasture.
After all, almost any business that can get almost 100,000 new
customers in a year should be trying to figure out how to either add a zero to
that number in a year or two, or at least double it, perhaps, in the second year.
The company’s year two plan seems unambitious at first glance, even though
the profits double.
Meanwhile, on the downside:
The $4 incentive (No. 7) might deliver too few sales and need to be
beefed up, changing net revenues adversely
App-store (No.12) approval process could delay launch in the biggest
channel, hurting revenues
More staff (No. 15) might be needed for support, channel relations, or
who-knows-what
Mobile sales direct to consumers (No. 5) could be a total flop, hurting
that revenue
Even though the numbers look pretty good in the spreadsheet, hold the
high-fives and look at ways to improve them anyway. After all, they’re still
estimates based on customer validation proof—they’re not money in the bank
by any means. Review the “what’s a founder to do” section under
Spreadsheet 1 to explore ways to reduce the cash burn where it makes sense.
Hold all these thoughts—and others—for the final section of this phase, the
pivot-or-proceed discussion.

“Metrics That Matter”: Multi-sided/Ad-Supported Model
 (Table 6.3)
Note: the leftmost numbers refer to commentary in descriptive text that
follows.
Metrics that Matter: Example 3
A Multi-sided Market Example
Here’s a third way to look at a totally different business model 
for the exact
same product,
 XPensePro software. Let’s explore a multi-sided market,
where the product is identical but it’s 
absolutely free to users.
 Advertisers
eager to reach businesspeople with active expense accounts will pay to reach
the audience, and company revenues come from advertising and sales of e-
mail lists, the other “side” in this multi-sided market example.
A multi-sided market, where the product is
identical but it’s absolutely free to users.
 
In this scenario, our venture-backed multi-sided market company is
offering its products to users for free, provided that they agree to receive two
e-mails per week from advertisers. The product is a digital download, but
considerable resources are expended selling ads to the other side of the
market. (It’s interesting to note how dissimilar these metrics that matter are
when compared with the other two business models.) As in the previous
example, several things are factored into the numbers above:
Our VC-backed example has a $10-million war chest
Product-development cost is heavy at first and then declines
Product costs are practically zero, since the “product” is a download.
Revenue never scales dramatically, since the market type is “re-
segmenting/niche market,” but the year-to-year revenue increases are
significant enough to promise downstream success
Much of the cost of advertising and e-mail sales is factored into the
revenue numbers, which are net of network or rep commission costs
It still costs real money to acquire users through PR, e-mail, and other
activities, even for a free product. As the company iterates and becomes
smarter, its acquisition cost declines in the second year
Metrics that Matter/Add It All Up
There are 16 “metrics that matter” in this spreadsheet because we need to
monitor revenue and costs on both sides of the multi-sided market. (The
company pivoted and eliminated cash sales of its product in this scenario.)
Following the left-hand column of the spreadsheet, let’s explore the origin of
each number as well as its source a little more closely:
1.
   New activated users :
 How many people will download the free app and
begin actively using it. 
Active
 is defined as generating at least the average
number of page views (No. 4).
2.
   New user acquisition cost @ $3:
 On average, the customer acquisition
costs to generate one active user (No. 1). Some will come virally for free,
others will cost $6 or more.
3.
   Total active users:
 Average active monthly users during the quarter.
4.
   Average page views per user per quarter:
 Actual user clicks on the site
will generate this number by dividing the number of active users (No. 3)
into total page views (No. 5). This is an important measure of the
business health and growth.
5.
   Total page views per quarter:
 Multiply the total users (No. 3) by the
average page views per user (No. 4) to begin to understand available
advertising-sales opportunities for the period.
6.
   Less attrition:
 Lots of users abandon things they download but don’t
have to pay for, so watching this number (generated by instrumentation)
is important. We’ve defined attrition as a user who hasn’t generated a
page view a week for two consecutive months.
7.
   TOTAL CPMs to sell:
 subtract attrition (No. 6) from total page views
(No. 5) and divide by 1,000 for the “salable CPMs” needed (ad sales are
based on cost per thousand, or CPM). The +/- 7% average gets worse in
year two as more competitors emerge.
8.
   Average CPM x 4 ads/page:
 Competitive analysis and “buy-side”
customer validation research will determine what CPM advertisers are
willing to pay to reach this audience. Assuming four ads on each page,
multiply the average CPM by 4 to compute the average revenue per 1,000
pages viewed. In this example, we’ve already deducted the cost of sales,
whether it’s commissions for sales reps or network ad sales. 
The CPM
increases (Q3-4) as the site gets more attractive to advertisers.
9.
   TOTAL ADVERTISING REVENUE:
 multiply the number of M’s (No.
7) or total CPMs available for sale by the 4x average CPM (No. 8) to
compute advertising revenue. The figure grows dramatically as the
number of users and their site traffic rise.
The business model looks so strong and
compelling...
 
10.
  E-mail-list rental revenue:
 An estimate based on competitive analysis
and buy-side customer validation research. This starts out small and at
very low rates (per thousand) and, both CPM and volume build as the
audience becomes large enough to be attractive to advertisers.
11.
  TOTAL REVENUE:
 This ad-supported multi-sided marketer has only
two sources of revenue. Add the advertising revenue (No. 9) to the e-
mail-list rental revenue (No. 10).
12.
  (Less) user acquisition cost:
 Subtract the number from Line 2 here.
13.
  (Less) product/product-development cost:
 Computed from customer
validation and cost structure boxes of the business model. While this
declines later in the first year as the initial product matures, the budget
increases in the second year to add features that will help the company
continue attracting new customers.
14.
  (Less) current operating costs:
 Compute the costs of turning on the
lights at the company every day, as the EZ Gardner example, line 9 on
page 442.
15.
  CASH BURN per period:
 Subtract the three cost centers (Nos. 12, 13
and 14) from the total revenue (No. 11) to compute the quarterly cash
burn.
16.
  Cash remaining/end of quarter:
 Subtract the cash burned (or collected)
during the quarter from the checkbook balance as of the first day of the
quarter to calculate the cash remaining at quarter’s end. This number
becomes attractive rather quickly in this model.
If These Were Your Numbers, What’s a founder to
do?
There’s an old rule in startups that a spreadsheet is worth 48.5x the paper it’s
printed on. But if this spreadsheet set of “metrics that matter,” is anywhere
close to accurate, our founders and investors at Expensereporter may indeed
have a homerun on their hands.
In this case, the business model looks so strong and compelling that the
founders have two clear priorities. Job #1 is to play strong defense, and make
certain that they deliver on all the key numbers in the plan (which, as you
recall, are already turned into immutable facts through two grueling stages of
Customer Development). That process starts with a step-by-step revalidation
of every single number on the page, to be sure there are no mistakes. Next
step: a detailed “worst case” analysis.
As every business should, the founding team here should expand this
one set of metrics into three: a worst case and a high case, on both sides of
the hypothetical set of metrics shown here. And since the business is totally
dependent on advertising revenue, they should quickly return to their channel
validation efforts and probe further to make sure they’re as valid as everyone
believes. They should also focus on reducing user attrition.
With all that accomplished, review the analyses from Spreadsheets 1 and
2 about reducing costs and optimizing activation and revenue. Then, just in
case, put a case of great French Champagne in the office fridge!
Some Final Thoughts About the Financial Model
Market Type Affects Revenue Streams.
 Each of the four market types has a
distinctive sales-growth curve shaped by the degree of difficulty involved in
transitioning from sales to the earlyvangelists to sales to mainstream
customers. Obviously in new markets, it typically takes considerable time for
the product to catch on beyond earlyvangelists, who aren’t typically high-
volume mainstream buyers. So success with early sales doesn’t guarantee fast
revenue scaling.
The sales-growth curves for a new market and an existing market
graphically illustrate the difference. Even after finding and successfully
selling to earlyvangelists, the rate of sales differs in later years because of the
different adoption rates of mainstream customers.
Revenue Growth in New and Existing Markets
 (Figure 6.3)
Estimating revenue in an existing market is relatively simple: Look at
the incumbents and calculate the increasing percentage of market share the
startup will grab each year.
Estimating a new market’s size might seem impossible, since it doesn’t
exist yet. What to do? Estimate the opportunity based on proxies and adjacent
markets. See if there are any comparable companies. Have others grown as
fast as the estimate? Why will this startup perform similarly?
Revenue Growth in a Resegmented Market
 (Figure 6.4)
The sales curve in a re-segmented market is somewhat easier to
estimate. It’s generally similar to that of a new market in that it takes time to
gather a head of steam. There are three steps to assessing a re-segmented
market: assess the size of the existing market, figure out how large your
startup’s “segment” is, and calculate the adoption rate, or the time it will take
for that segment to recognize the new product as the solution of choice.
Count only the segment that will switch, and beware of long-term contracts,
service contracts, and “sunk costs” such as training and installation, all of
which are often “lock-ins” or hidden barriers to switching.
Revenue growth curves depend on Market Type!
 
Demand Curve Affects Revenue:
 The “demand curve” seeks the optimum
intersection between sales volume and net profit. For example, if a physical
product is most efficiently manufactured in lot sizes of 5,000, can that
inventory be sold in a reasonable time when current unit sales are 50 a
month? A startup selling new electric cars for $29,000 will generate massive
demand. But if they cost $45,000 to manufacture, the company will go
bankrupt very quickly. Consider:
the actual price per unit, for multiples, and for subscriptions
how pricing can be used to attract more users
how pricing can create larger or more frequent purchases by the same
user; volume discounts, free shipping, loyalty points and similar pricing
mechanisms are used for what’s typically called “market basket”
optimization
how pricing can be used to enhance profitability or volume
how the company can forward-price the product to intersect the
economies-of-scale curve (as in, “If we could build 10,000 at a time, our
production cost drops 32 percent”)
When to Bring in the Accountants
Eventually, prospective investors, banks, and others will want to see the
traditional P&L, forecast, and more, and that’s fine. Once the metrics that
matter are firmly understood to make sound business sense 
and are validated,
almost any finance type (or high school math student) can convert them into a
VC-ready multiyear P&L spreadsheet, balance sheet, and cash-flow statement
(the “usual stuff” everyone is accustomed to seeing) with ease.
On rare and welcome occasions, metrics that matter actually don’t
matter at all. If customer acquisition and activation are proceeding at warp
speed month after month or the economy is hot, investors may ignore most of
the other metrics, throw caution to the wind, and vote to scale the company
rapidly. This seldom happens, but we hope it happens to you. It can happen
more often in frothy vertical markets, as it did in social networking and other
multi-sided markets or strong IPO markets,. But nine times out of 10, the
metrics that matter do matter quite a bit when it comes time to spend serious
investor dollars.
Adding it all up
This phase is a vital make-or-break analysis of how well the business model
should work. But remember that the numbers are still only educated guesses,
validated—we hope—through extensive customer discovery and validation
effort with scores if not hundreds of customers.
Pivot or Proceed: 
Re
-Validate the Business Model
It’s the perfect time to take one last look at the key business model
components, for several reasons. In a few days, a great deal will change if the
vote is “go forward” to the customer creation step. Customer creation is a
radically different stage during which the company suddenly shifts from
“searching for a business model” to “executing one.” It’s no longer
celebrating mistakes and wrong turns. It shifts full-throttle into “execute”
mode, with revenue targets and timetables to hit, product and plans to deliver,
and more granular and precise accountability to investors and board
members.
The company is about to spend a great deal of money far faster, and
irrevocably, as it works ambitiously to deliver its chosen business model.
With that comes the typical “career risk” for founders, which always prompts
investors to ask if the seemingly manic “founder type” should be replaced by
a “seasoned” leader with proven execution skills. Massive amounts of money
are about to be spent on a single, focused bet that the business model, as
developed, has a high likelihood of scaling to profit and success. Boards and
investors are suddenly less forgiving and typically far less welcoming of
reports like “That idea was wrong” and “That didn’t work as we hoped” than
they were during the earlier “search” phases.
Long story short, it’s time to revisit the core business model elements
one last time.
Best Bets
You’re almost done. You’ve run the numbers in the last section and are still
feeling like your business is a winner. But have you picked the best value
proposition? Is your product delivery schedule right? Are you confident
you’ve gotten the optimum revenue model and costs? And have you missed
any best moves on the overall business model? Here are a few last things to
check.
Make Sure the Value Proposition is Right
After going through the “metrics that matter” in the last section, are you
absolutely convinced you have the right value proposition? You’re about to
live with it for awhile. If you don’t feel that it’s going to win the marketplace
now, it doesn’t get better over time. It may be time to reconfigure, repackage
or unbundle the product. This requires a loop all the way back to customer
discovery. Once there, use the core technology to develop another product,
configuration, distribution method or price and then modify product
presentations and return to Phase 3 (product presentation) and do it again.
Yes, it hurts, but it hurts far less than failure.
Make Sure the Product Delivery is Right
Even with selling success, check the product delivery timing with the
product-development team. Schedules inevitably change, seldom for the
better. Can the company still deliver what was just sold and do so as
promised, or was the sale actually vaporware? If vaporware, at best the
company secured a few pilot projects. Continuing to sell as if nothing has
changed is a bad idea. As schedules slip, hard-won earlyvangelists weaken,
and references evaporate quickly. The good news is, if this happens (it
happens often), the situation is still recoverable. There aren’t many people to
fire, and the burn rate is low. (As discussed earlier, it’s always important to
have enough cash to get this phase wrong at least once.) The solution is to
shut down any additional selling for a while, admit mistakes, and turn pilot
projects into something useful—first for the customer and then as a
marketable product.
Make Sure the Revenue is High and Costs are Low
There’s nothing worse than leaving money on the table or spending more
than you needed to. The best way to answer these questions and more is to
“walk” slowly through the business model one more time.
Start with the value proposition. Are there too many features or not
enough variety? Would a lower price sell far more units or sell the same
number at a lower acquisition cost? What if the product were free, or
free to those bringing three or five or 10 other customers along?
In the customer-relationships hypothesis, is there rock-solid confidence
in the plan, or might a freemium or multi-sided alternative deliver
bolder, faster growth? Will that costly AdWords effort deliver the
planned result?
Can a different channel deliver fewer sales and more profit?
Will partners deliver the revenue growth you need and expect?
Are there higher level business model patterns you may have missed?
Make Sure Your Business Model is Right
Grab a fresh business model canvas and a pack of Post-it notes. Explore
alternatives seriously. The team is about to put a big pile of chips, probably
millions, on “red” or “black,” as in “pass” or “fail.” Is everyone confident the
choice is the right?
Changing direction at this juncture is a bold move indeed. It’s not what
the investors expected, especially after a long, grueling process of customer
discovery and validation. Then again, bold moves are the work of great
entrepreneurs. And even though a pivot at this point leads to more customer
validation and more time, it’s far better to pivot now than to forge ahead at
full speed and full spend if it’s possible that there’s a better idea out there
somewhere.
Further validate the business model, not just looking for enhancements
in revenue opportunity and places to reduce cost, but looking for “game
changers.” Can you change a product sold by features into a branded-
experience that becomes a “got-to-have-it” fashion? Can you change a
revenue model from a unit sale into a network effects model? Look for the
non-obvious business patterns. Even if the team is certain the current model
is the best way forward, now’s the time to bring in your advisory board and
have them throw stones (painful as it is) at your canvas. Do they see a huge
move that you missed? No doubt the financial model review just completed
raised at least a handful of questions and perhaps pointed to some
opportunities. Revisit the business model checklist questions. Are any of the
answers different? Does the team want to have more money in the bank or
spend less? Where can savings be effected or additional dollars efficiently put
to good?
If the team has turned over every possibility in its review, looking both
at radical changes and modest improvements in the business model, and
confidence still carries the day, it’s time to move on to the ultimate question:
pivot or proceed?
The Toughest Startup Question: Pivot or Proceed?
This is the moment of truth when the team and the investors will vote on
whether to begin spending massive amounts of money to execute the business
model. To vote honestly, the team needs to take a hard, honest look at the
pivot-or-proceed analyses developed in this phase.
As grueling as the customer validation process is, it’s quite likely that
the company will require another turn of the wheel before everyone can
enthusiastically vote to move forward. Don’t despair—this need to pivot
arises almost every time, and often calls for a return all the way to customer
discovery.
Hubris is the evil twin of a passionate entrepreneur.
 
The alternative is even more painful. In the past, investors magically
assumed flawless execution and fired executives who failed. It’s time to
reflect, thinking seriously about the company’s genuine chances for scalable,
profitable success. It’s a hard decision, particularly for self-confident
entrepreneurs who pride themselves on their tenacity, and problem-solving
abilities. “I’m an entrepreneur. I make things happen against all odds” just
doesn’t cut it when staring at the hard facts and statistics. Don’t confuse
hubris with passion or facts.
Did validation really convert opinions to facts, or is everyone just
moving the goalposts to reach customer creation? The next step seriously
cranks up the company’s cash burn rate, sharply diminishing if not
extinguishing available cash or runway.
Did the product sell well and easily? Is it absolutely, unequivocally clear
that when more money is spent to acquire customers, they’ll arrive at a
steady, predictable, profitable pace? This question in particular probably
sends 90 percent of startups back into the depths of Customer Development
to refine and retest components of the business model.
If the “ramp” to more customers, revenue and profits isn’t proved to be
predictable in test results, it’s also a reason to pivot. Using everything you
learned in customer validation, go back to Phase 1 of this step (get ready to
sell) and try it again. Sorry. This isn’t easy to do.
If everything checks out (again, it seldom does the first time around), the
end of customer validation is a major milestone. Customer problems are
understood, a set of earlyvangelists has been found, and the company has
delivered a product its customers want to buy, developed a repeatable and
scalable sales process, and demonstrated a profitable business model.
Hopefully, all the learning is captured in writing and the business model
diagram is updated. Fund-raising, while never easy, will be far easier than at
this point than it was before.
When you’ve answered “yes” to that taxing list of questions, you
deserve a night off, if not a week. Congratulations! The company is prepared
to move full speed ahead to the customer creation process.
 What’s Next?
The first two steps of Customer Development are where entrepreneurs live or
die in the search for a repeatable and scalable business model. When a
company has successfully exited Customer Validation, there’s a library full
of business-building texts available to help execute the business model. So, at
least for now, if you’re eager to execute the next two steps—Customer
Creation and Company Building—return to the original Four Steps to the
Epiphany, or turn to a more targeted text for fine-tuned support.
Whatever you do next, the successful completion of Customer
Validation is a momentous step in the life of your startup. You have
completed an arduous, challenging journey. Our warmest, most sincere
congratulations. We look forward to learning about your success!
The Startup Owner’s Manual
Strategy Guide
Index
A
  |  
B
  |  
C
  |  
D
E
  |  
F
  |  
G
  |  
H
I
  |  
L
  |  
M
  |  
N
O
  |  
P
  |  
R
  |  
S
T
  |  
V
  |  
W
A
advertising
     
validation with
     
see also
 
multi-sided markets
advisory boards
agile development
     
as incremental
     
pairing customer development with
alpha test
B
beta test
bits
,
“Blue Ocean Strategy” (Kim and Mauborgne)
board members
     
communication with
     
customer development adoption by
     
startup metric tracking by
     
use of traditional performance metrics
budget. 
see
 
spending
business model canvas
     briefs. 
see
 
hypotheses briefs
     
guides validation priorities
     
overview of
     
as validation scorecard
     
weekly score keeping via
Business Model Generation
 (Osterwalder)
business models
     
cloning existing
     
customer discovery/validation tests
     
financing
     validating
          
checklist for
          
by team meeting
     
winning startup
business plan
buyable startups
C
cash burn
     
via premature scaling
channels, sales
     
as validation priority
     
validation speed as affected by
     
in waterfall method
     
see also
 
physical channels
; 
web/mobile channels
cloned business models
companies, large
     
entrepreneurship within
     
“knowns” as business model basis
     
marketing methods of
     
product-intro method for
     
startups mimicking
company building
concept/seed stage
consultants
customer creation
     
overview of
customer data
     
turning hypotheses into
     
when to ignore
customer development
     
cost
     
IMVU case study
     
informs vision
     
Manifesto
     
overview of
     
success via
     team
          
company-building from
          
face-to-face validation by
          
replaces traditional titles
customer discovery
     
four phases of
     
goal of
     
overview of
     
weekly score-keeping for
customer feedback
     
in customer discovery phase
     
as essential
     
iteration as driven by
     
MVP as soliciting
     
in new markets
     
pivots in response to
customer relationships
     
create demand
     
validating (web/mobile)
     
see also
 
“get, keep, and grow” customers
customer segments
     
marketing based on
customer validation
     
determines product/market fit
     
E.piphany as case study of
     
face-to-face
     
founders lead
     
four phases of
     
as “get ready to sell”
     
metrics for tracking
     
overview of
     
priorities
     
sign of completed
     
spending constraint in
     
with users
customers
     earlyvangelist. 
see
 
earlyvangelists
     
marketing to known
     
presumptions about
     
see also
 
“get, keep, and grow” customers
D
death spiral
E
earlyvangelists
     
catering MVP to
     
customer validation with
     
defined
engineering
     
designs for hypotheses tests
     
iterative
     
in waterfall method
entrepreneurial management science
errors.
 
see
 
mistakes
 
escape velocity
“execute” mode
     
excludes learning/discovery
     
pre-planned
     
vs. “search”
“executing” business models
     
see also
 
customer creation
executives
     
post-startup hiring of
     
“search” vs. “execute” mode of
     
skills needed in startup
     
unlearning of traditional sales
existing markets
     
product-intro into
     re-segmenting. 
see
 
re-segmented markets
F
Facebook
failure. 
see
 
mistakes
features, product
     
limited MVP
     
uneducated assumptions about
financial model. 
see
 
revenue model
first customer ship
founders
     
customer validation as led by
     
heroic journey of
     
interaction with customers
     
passion-driven
     
vision/instinct of
G
“get, keep, and grow” customers
     
as validation priority
“Get Out of the Building”
     
for customer validation
     
as essential approach
     
for web/mobile products
Groupon
H
high-fidelity MVP
     
as validation tool
hypotheses briefs
     
on the business model canvas
hypotheses tests
     
on the business model canvas
     
vs. “business plan”
     
customer discovery as
     
designing
     
“execute” mode vs.
     
by IMVU
     
measuring success in
     
metrics for tracking
     
in pivot-or-proceed phase
     
as trial and error
I
IMVU
invention risk
Iridium
iteration
     
continuous
     
via “failure”
     
launch dates ignore
     
speed of
     
weekly score-keeping for
     
see also
 
pivots
L
launch. 
see
 
product launch
Lean Startup
M
management by crisis
market type
     
defined
     
knowing your
     
relevance of contacts to
     
see also
 
existing markets
; 
new markets
marketing
     online
          
creative
     
traditional
market-requirements document (MRD)
MBA curriculum
metrics, performance
     
essential for startups
     
tracking cost
     
traditional
minimum viable product (MVP)
     
earlyvangelists’ adoption of
     “high fidelity”. 
see
 
high-fidelity MVP
     
minimal features in
     
web/mobile
mistakes
     
cost money
     
importance of
     
made by Iridium
     
pivots in response to
     
in traditional sales method
mobile products. 
see
 
web/mobile products
multi-sided markets
     
earlyvangelists in
     
“Get Out of the Building” for
     
validation priorities for
N
National Science Foundation
new markets
     
customer discovery in
niche markets. 
see
 
re-segmented markets
O
online marketing. 
see
 
marketing
Osterwalder, Alexander
P
passion
physical channels
     
vs. web/mobile
physical products
     
physical vs. web channels for
     
turned into bits
pivot-or-proceed
     
business model validation
     
data assembly for
     
three steps to answering
     
web/mobile data to review
pivots
     
business model canvas guides
     
continuous
     
in customer discovery phase
premature scaling
problem/need (customer)
     
active/acute
     
earlyvangelists’ awareness of
problem/solution fit
problem/solution hypotheses
     
customer feedback on
     
testing
product development
     
for earlyvangelists
     
for the few, not the many
     
of MVP
     
waterfall method of
product launch
     
cash burn following
     
error of focus on
product specs
product-introduction, traditional
     
commitment to “plan” in
     
customer development is not
     
defined
     
failure as unacceptable in
     
nine errors of
     
vs. startup process
product/market fit
     
determining
R
repeatable business model
re-segmented markets
     
defined
revenue model
     
as validation priority
reversible decisions
risk
     
in customer creation phase
     
forms of
S
sales
     funnel
          
predictability of
          
roadmap
          
see also
 
“get” customers
sales roadmap
     
customer discovery as informing
     
“execution” prior to
sales team
     
unlearning by
     
use of roadmap by
scalability
     
defined
     
testing
scaling
     
cost of
     
hot-ticket products
     
premature
Schwab
“search” for business model
     
customer development is
     
“execution” as confused with
     
failure as integral to
     
non-linear
     
preserve cash during
     
startups function as
     
winners work to
small business entrepreneurship
social entrepreneurs
solution
     
product as
spending
     
constraining
     
validation before
startups
     
executive skills needed for
     
“failure” as essential to
     
five types of
     
at “Internet speed”
     
job titles in
     
key components of
     
metrics for
     
as passionate
     
speed/tempo of decision-making
     
spending tempo for
     team. 
see
 
team, startup
     
transition to company status
     
visionary instinct of
     
winning vs. losing
T
team, startup
     
sharing info among
     
skills needed for
“test” sales
     
customer validation as
     
to earlyvangelists
     
of MVP
V
value proposition
     
as validation priority
venture capital
viral marketing. 
see
 
marketing
vision
     
customer development informs
     
testing founders’
W
waterfall method
     
as divorced from customer
     
of product development
web/mobile channels
     
history of
web/mobile products
     
business model validation for
     
earlyvangelists’ use of
     
“Get Out of the Building” for
     
“get ready to sell” actions
     
MVPS for
     
refining “get” activities for
     
sudden take-off of
Webvan

The Startup Owner’s Manual for
Web/Mobile Channel Startups
Table of Contents
How to Read This Book
Getting Started
     
Chapter 1:
The Customer Development Manifesto
STEP ONE: Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 2:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 3:
Customer Discovery, Phase One:
State Your Business Model Hypotheses
     
Chapter 4:
Customer Discovery, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do People Care?”
     
Chapter 5:
Customer Discovery, Phase Three:
“Get Out of the Building” and Test the Product Solution
     
Chapter 6:
Customer Discovery, Phase Four:
Verify the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
STEP TWO: Customer Validation
     
Chapter 7:
Introduction to Customer Validation
     
Chapter 8:
Customer Validation, Phase One:
“Get Ready to Sell”
     
Chapter 9:
Customer Validation, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building and Sell!”
     
Chapter 10:
Customer Validation, Phase Three:
Develop Product and Company Positioning
     
Chapter 11:
Customer Validation, Phase Four:
The Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
How to Build a Web Startup: A Simple Overview
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Web/Mobile Channel Startups Index
How to Read This Book
C
LEARLY,
 
T
HE
 S
TARTUP
 O
WNER’S
 M
ANUAL
 IS
 not a novel. This book is a step-
by-step how-to guide that details a process for building a successful,
profitable, scalable startup. It has more in common with a car repair manual
than it does with your favorite page-turner. Don’t attempt to read this book in
a single sitting or long weekend. It will be your companion—and, we hope,
your very best friend—for the six to 30 months or more that it often takes to
begin building a successful, scalable startup business.
Organization
This book is organized in four distinct sections. The first, Getting Started,
features the 
“Customer Development Manifesto,”
 a series of 14 guiding
principles for startups deploying the Customer Development process.
Don’t read too much at a time.
 
The next section, Step One, 
“Customer Discovery,”
 turns the founders’
vision into a business model canvas and then into a series of hypotheses.
Those hypotheses are turned into experiments, and tested with customers to
see if your understanding of the customer problem and proposed solution
mesh.
Step Two, 
“Customer Validation,”
 expands the scope of the business
model testing to see if you can get enough orders or users to prove that you
have a repeatable and scalable business model.
Interspersed throughout is a series of Checklists that help you track your
progress at every stage of the Customer Development process. Use the
checklists at the end of each step (yes, there’s one for each) to make sure you
have completed all the key tasks outlined in that step. Download them, share
them, and circulate them to team members. But most important, use them to
be sure you have completed each step—before you move on to the next.
Paths Through This Book
     •   
Read the 
glossary
 first.
 Customer Development has a language all its
own.
     •   Before you dive into the details, 
read the 
Customer Development
Manifesto
.
     •   
If you are familiar with Customer Development,
 skim 
Chapters 1-2
,
start with 
Chapter 3
, “the business model hypotheses.”
     •   If you want to 
align co-founders, initial employees, investors and
advisors around the Customer Development philosophy,
 have them
read 
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Edition
.
     •   
If you want a high-speed overview and little more,
 there are two
approaches:
          (a)  skim the checklists at the end of each step, which will give you a
sense of all the tasks you must complete to implement Customer
Development; or
          (b)  flip through the book, looking for “jumbo quotes” like this:
This book is not a novel... It’s a reference manual.
 
These quotes highlight the 100 or so “big ideas” found throughout the
book and offer a “CliffsNotes” or “Twitter” sense of the text.
     •   
If you want a detailed checklist of the things founders need to get right,
start with 
Chapter 3
, “the business model hypothesis,” and use the
checklists in at the end of each step.
     •   
If your startup is well under way,
 you might want to start at 
Chapter 6
,
“Pivot or Proceed,” to gauge your progress. Then you can jump to
Chapter 11
, “Metrics that Matter,” to see if you’re ready to scale.
     •   To 
develop and test a web/mobile minimum viable product
 (MVP),
read: 
Design Tests
, 
Build Your Low Fidelity MVP
, 
Low Fidelity
MVP Problem Test
, and 
Optimize Getting More Customers
.
     •   To focus on 
web/mobile marketing
 (how to “get,” “keep” and “grow”
customers), read:
          
   Hypotheses: 
Customer Source/Wiring
, 
Channels
, and 
Customer
Relationships
.
          
   
Build Your Low Fidelity MVP
, 
Low Fidelity MVP Problem Test
,
Traffic/Competitive Analysis
, 
High Fidelity MVP Test
, and
Measure Customer Behavior
.
          
   Get Ready to Sell: 
Craft Positioning Statement
, 
Acquire/ Activate
Customers Plan
, 
Create a High Fidelity MVP
, 
Build a Metrics
Tool Set
, and 
Hire a Data Analytics Chief
.
          
   Get Out of the Building: 
Prepare Optimization Plans/Tools
,
Optimize Getting More Customers
, 
Optimize “Keep” and
“Grow”
), 
Test Sell Traffic Partners
.
     •   Educators who want to 
teach Customer Development
 or the experiential
Lean LaunchPad
 class should read:
          
   Our website, 
www.steveblank.com,
 with links to our syllabi used at
Stanford, Berkeley and the National Science Foundation.
          
   Before the class meets, have the students read:
               —  
The Customer Development Manifesto
 in Chapter 1
               —  
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
 in Chapter 2
          
   Each week’s lectures are organized around 
each of the individual
hypotheses in Phase 1
.
          
   For the 
Lean LaunchPad
 class
, have students read:
               —  
Get Out of the Building and Test the Problem
 in Chapter 4.
               —  
Get Out of the Building and Test the Product Solution
 in
Chapter 5.
          
   All classes should read:
               —  
Pivot or Proceed
, in Chapter 6.
               —  
Metrics that Matter
, in Chapter 11.
A Few Helpful Tips
USE the book, don’t just read it!
Use the checklists.
 There is one for every step.
Don’t read too much at a time.
 This is a reference manual. It’s
exhausting when read as a book.
Scan ahead.
 It gives you context for what you are currently doing. If
you’re starting work on 
Chapter 3
, for example, quickly scan 
Chapter 4
 first
so you understand how what you’re doing now supports what comes next.
 
For a helpful online tool to monitor your team’s progress
 in the
Customer Development process visit
http://www.zoomstra.com/foundersworkbook/
.
 
Entrepreneurship is not a cookbook or a checklist.
 At the end of the day,
founders are artists. Don’t expect everything to work like the book. It’s
impossible for this book to address every entrepreneurial decision and every
type of startup. You’re outside the building not only looking for facts, but for
insight and inspiration. Not every piece of advice fits every situation you’ll
encounter. And not every piece of advice will always work. That’s what
entrepreneurs are for.
I
Getting Started
Chapter 1:
The Customer Development Manifesto
CHAPTER 1
The Customer Development
Manifesto
B
EFORE DIVING HEADFIRST INTO THE DETAILS
 of the Customer Development
process, it’s crucial to review the 14 rules that make up 
The Customer
Development Manifesto
. Embrace them. Review them regularly with the team
and (maybe after the IPO) consider perhaps even etching them in marble at
world headquarters.
Rule No. 1:
There Are No Facts Inside Your Building, So Get
Outside.
On Day One, the startup is a faith-based enterprise built on its founders’
vision and a notable absence of facts. The founders’ job is to translate this
vision and these hypotheses into facts. Facts live outside the building, where
future customers (prospects, really) live and work, so that’s where you need
to go. Nothing is more fundamental to Customer Development, and nothing
is harder to do. It’s much easier to write code, build hardware, have meetings
and write reports than it is to find and listen to potential customers. But that’s
what separates the winners from the losers.
Facts live outside the building, where future
customers live and work...
 
In Customer Development, the 
founders gather firsthand experience
about every component of the business model. The team can support the
founders, but firsthand 
experience by definition cannot be delegated.
 This
customer research must be done by founders because:
Key customer feedback points are random, unpredictable, and often
painful to hear. Employees hate to deliver bad news to higher-ups
Employees have far less at stake and seldom listen as acutely, and they
don’t get heard adequately when they report back. It’s too easy to
dismiss their findings as “hearsay” or to ignore critical points of
feedback
Consultants have even less at stake than employees and often color their
commentary to either tell the client what he wants to hear or deliver
messages that can lead to extended consulting relationships. This is also
second- or third-hand feedback and too diluted or diffused to provide
value
Only a founder can embrace the feedback, react to it, and adeptly make
the decisions necessary to change or pivot key business model components.
Rule No. 2:
Pair Customer Development with Agile
Development
Customer Development is useless unless the product
development organization can iterate the product
with speed and agility.
 
Customer Development is useless unless the product development
organization can iterate the product with speed and agility. If Engineering
builds the product using waterfall development, it will be deaf, dumb and
blind to customer input except during a short period when it’s specifying the
product. The rest of the time, engineers are locked into an implementation
cycle, unable to change the product features without intolerable delay. By
contrast, a startup engineering organization 
using an agile methodology is
designed to continually take customer input and deliver a product that iterates
readily around an MVP or its minimum feature set.
In this book, 
agile engineering/development
 refers to the rapid
deployment, iterative development and continuous discovery processes that
hardware or software companies can use. We don’t advocate any particular
flavor, just its necessity. The Customer Development process provides the
continuous customer input to make agile work.
Before the company even starts, the founders need to reach a deep and
inexorable commitment to the customer/agile development partnership.
Rule No. 3:
Failure is an Integral Part of the Search
One of the key differences between a startup and an existing company is the
one that’s never explicitly stated: “startups go from failure to failure.”
In contrast, existing companies have learned what works and doesn’t.
Failures in an existing company are an exception. They happen when
someone screws up. In a startup, you’re 
searching,
 not 
executing,
 and the
only way to find the right path is to try lots of experiments and take a lot of
wrong turns. 
Failure is part of the process
.
If you’re afraid to fail in a startup, you’re destined
to do so.
 
Failures are not truly failures, per se but an integral part of the startup
learning process. You’ll be running dozens if not hundreds of pass/fail tests
—on your pitch, your features, your pricing, and on and on—so get ready to
accept failure and move on. When something isn’t working, successful
founders orient themselves to the new facts, decide what needs fixing, and act
decisively.
The Customer Development process demands frequent, agile iteration,
followed, of course, by testing of the iteration that often leads to another
iteration or pivot, which leads to more testing and...
If you’re afraid to fail in a startup, you’re destined to do so.
Rule No. 4:
Make Continuous Iterations and Pivots
The strategy of embracing failure in Customer Development demands
frequent, agile iteration and pivots. A pivot is a substantive change in one or
more of the nine boxes of the business model canvas. (For example, a pricing
change from freemium to subscription model or a customer segment shift
from boys 12-15 years old to women 45-60.) Or it can be more complex,
such as a change of target customer or user. Iterations, meanwhile, are minor
changes to business model components (e.g., changing pricing from $99 to
$79).
Groupon’s legendary $12 billion pivot is a perfect
example.
 
When a company is limping along, only a dramatic change to one or
more business model components can get it back on the road to success.
Groupon’s legendary $12 billion pivot (their IPO valuation) is a perfect
example. Groupon was started from a company called the Point. It was
struggling, at best, as a social media platform working to get people together
to solve problems, but was about to run out of money.
The most effective campaigns on The Point were those that saved people
money by grouping or bundling their purchases. The founders started
blogging various deals from different businesses each day. They called this,
“Get Your 
Groupon.com
.” Groupon’s first offer hit in October of 2008: buy
two pizzas for the 
price of one in the shop on the first floor of its Chicago
headquarters. Twenty people bought the deal and the company was well on
its way to its $12-billion pivot.
Pivots are driven by the learnings and insight from a continuous stream
of “pass/fail” tests you run throughout discovery and validation.
The best startup founders don’t hesitate to make the change. They admit
when hypotheses are wrong and adapt.
Rule No. 5:
No Business Plan Survives First Contact with
Customers So Use a 
Business Model Canvas
There’s only one reason for a business plan: some investor who went to
business school doesn’t know any better and wants to see one. But once it has
delivered financing, the business plan is fundamentally useless.
Entrepreneurs often mistake their business plan as a cookbook for execution,
failing to recognize that it is only a collection of unproven assumptions. At its
back, a revenue plan blessed by an investor, and composed overwhelmingly
of guesses, suddenly becomes an operating plan driving hiring, firing, and
spending. Insanity.
The difference between a static business plan and a
dynamic model could well be the difference between
flameout and success.
 
The difference between a static business plan and a dynamic business
model could well be the difference between a flameout and success. Startups
should dump the business 
plan
 and adopt the flexible business 
model.
A business model describes the flow between key components of the
company:
value proposition,
 which the company offers (product/service, benefits)
customer segments,
 such as users, and payers, or moms or teens
distribution channels
 to reach customers and offer them the value
proposition
customer relationships
 to create demand
revenue streams
 generated by the value proposition(s)
resources
 needed to make the business model possible
activities
 necessary to implement the business model
partners
 who participate in the business and their motivations for doing
so
cost structure
 resulting from the business model
The business model 
canvas
 (see 
Figure 1.1
) presents a visual overview
of the nine components of a business on one page. In this book, Alexander
Osterwalder’s business model canvas serves as the scorecard for the customer
discovery process described in Step One. Osterwalder’s book 
Business Model
Generation
 (Wiley, 2010) provides the structure for the canvas.
Business Model Canvas
 (Figure 1.1)
As a startup moves through the Customer Development process, it will
use the business model canvas as a scorecard, by posting the hypotheses
about each component of the model and then revising the hypotheses as the
founders gather facts. Think of your first version of the business model
canvas as the starting point showing the hypotheses that must be confirmed in
face-to-face or online interaction with customers. More often than not, the
customers will reject components of the business model, saying, “I’d rather
buy that from a retailer,” or, “The product needs to have these features to be
important to me.” As customers approve or dispute the business model
hypotheses, the company either accepts the customers’ approval or pivots to
change its business model to better target the opportunity.
Using the business model canvas as a guide makes it easier to figure out
where and how to pivot, since the team can visually diagram its alternatives
and see what it needs to change. Each time the founders iterate or pivot (see
Rule No. 4
) in response to customer feedback, they draw a new canvas
showing the changes. Over time, these multiple canvases form a “flip book”
that shows the evolution of the business model. Agile startups can end up
with a six-inch-thick stack of business model diagrams they can burn at the
IPO-celebration bonfire.
Much more about how to use business model diagrams to “keep score”
throughout the customer discovery process can be found in 
Chapter 2
.
...hypothesis is just a fancy word for “guess.”
 
Rule No. 6:
Design Experiments and Test to Validate Your
Hypotheses
Initially, hypothesis is just a fancy word for “guess.” To turn hypotheses into
facts, founders need to get out of the building and 
test
 them in front of
customers. But how do you test? And what do you want to learn from the
tests? Testing and learning require you to be thoughtful on constructing and
designing your tests. We call this “designing the experiments.”
Customer Development experiments are short, simple, objective
pass/fail tests. You’re looking for a strong signal in the signal/noise noise
ratio, something like five of the first 12 customers you call on saying “I need
this right now, even if it’s still buggy.” Early tests aren’t necessarily precise,
but should give you a “good enough” signal to proceed.
The Customer Development Insight Cycle
 (Figure 1.2)
Start by asking yourself, “What insight do I need to move forward?”
Then ask, “What’s the simplest test I can run to get it?” Finally, think about,
“How do I design an experiment to run this simple test?”
One of the things that trips up engineering founders is thinking that
these tests have to be actual code, hardware or the real product. Most of the
time you can mock-up the web page or create a demo or physical prototype to
elicit valuable learning.
Rule No. 7:
Agree on Market Type. It Changes Everything
One of the radical insights guiding this book is that 
not all startups are alike.
One of the key ways in which they are different is in the relationship between
a startup’s 
new product and its market. These product/market relationships
generally fit one of these descriptions:
bringing a new product into an 
existing market
bringing a new product into a 
new market
bringing a new product into an existing market and trying to:
re-segment that market as a low-cost entrant or
re-segment that market 
as a niche entrant
cloning
 a business model that’s successful in another country
What confused entrepreneurs for decades is that the traditional product
introduction model works when introducing a product into an existing market
with a known business model (i.e., known customers, channels and markets).
However, since the majority of startups are not pursuing known markets
(those in new or re-segmented categories), they don’t really know who their
customers will be. These types of startups are searching for a repeatable and
scalable business model.
Market type influences everything a company does.
 
Market type influences everything a company does.
 Strategy and tactics
that work for one market type seldom work for another. Market type
determines the startup’s customer feedback and acquisition activities and
spending. It changes customer needs, adoption rates, product features and
positioning as well as its launch strategies, channels and activities. In sum,
different market types require dramatically different discovery, MVPs, and
sales and marketing strategies.
In existing markets,
 where customers exist, marketing is relatively easy:
users can describe the market and the attributes that matter the most to them.
The new product or service typically runs faster, does something better or
cheaper, or 
otherwise improves on a customer-defined attribute. Users, the
market, and competitors are known, and competition involves comparing the
product and its features with others.
In a new market,
 a company lets customers do something they couldn’t do
before by creating something that never existed before. Or it dramatically
lowers costs to create a new class of users. By definition, new markets have
no customers yet, so there’s nobody to know what the product can do or why
they should buy. This makes getting feedback and creating demand
particularly challenging, since the product is unknown to users and the
market is undefined and unknown, and costly to develop.
The key isn’t competing, but instead understanding whether a large
customer base exists and whether customers can be persuaded to buy. A
classic founder error in a new market is the “fast-burn” spending of sales and
marketing funds, a practice that may be appropriate when selling to existing
customers in a known market, but makes no sense in a new market. The new-
vs.-existing axis is at the core of the market-type definition.
Re-segmenting an existing market
 is useful when the incumbent is too
difficult to attack head-on (like Amazon, Facebook, or Microsoft). A re-
segmentation strategy is based on the startup’s market and customer
knowledge, ideally identifying a market opportunity that incumbents are
missing, which usually takes one of two forms: a low-cost strategy or a niche
strategy. (Unlike differentiation, segmentation forges a distinct spot in
customers’ minds that is unique, valuable, and in demand.)
Low-cost re-segmentation
 is just what it sounds like. Are there
customers at the low end of an existing market who will buy “good enough”
performance at a substantially lower price?
Niche re-segmentation
 looks at an existing market and asks whether
some segment of this market would buy a new product designed to address
more specific needs. Can some sizable portion of the market be convinced
that a characteristic of the new product is radical enough to change the rules
and shape of an existing market. 
See Chan Kim and Renee Mauborgne’s
work on 
“Blue Ocean Strategy”
 for another way to think of re-segmenting a
market.
Cloning an existing business model
 is a powerful technique when an
existing business has been proven in one country but has not yet been
introduced in another. Startups in Russia, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan and
China (each with its own large local market and language and cultural
barriers) can adopt, borrow, or copy a successful American business model
and customize it for local language and buying preferences. (Soon ideas from
those countries will be cloned in the U.S.)
For example, Baidu in China and Yandex in Russia are the equivalent of
Google in their respective markets. And Qzone, RenRen, PengYou and
Kaixin are the Facebooks of China, while Vkontakte and Odnoklassniki play
the same role in Russia.
Startup companies generally enter one of these four market types and
ultimately must commit to one. The consequences of a wrong market-type
choice will prove to be severe in the customer creation stage. While market
type is ultimately a “late-binding decision,” a working hypothesis helps frame
early customer discovery issues. Market-type decision-making is explored in
greater detail in 
Chapter 2
.
...the few financial metrics to track: cash-burn rate,
number of months’ worth of cash left...
 
Rule No. 8:
Startup Metrics Differ from Those in Existing
Companies
We now have several centuries’ worth of performance metrics for existing
businesses—P&Ls balance sheets, cash-flow forecasts and line-of-business
analyses, plus scores of others. Here’s hoping your startup becomes big
enough to need them someday. In the past (not so long ago), we used these
tools with startups because we didn’t know what else to measure. We now
know that startup metrics should focus on tracking the startup’s progress
converting guesses and hypotheses into incontrovertible facts rather than
measuring the execution of a static plan. It’s critical 
that board and
management continuously test and measure each hypothesis until the entire
business model is worth scaling into a company.
If the company is venture-backed, management and investors must agree
on a set of metrics that truly matter and work toward a report or “dashboard”
that essentially replaces the P&L, cash flow, and balance sheet as
centerpieces of early board meetings.
Startup metrics track the results of pass/fail tests and the iterations they lead
to:
Have the customer problem and product features been validated?
Does the minimum feature set resonate with customers?
Who in fact is the customer, and have initial customer-related
hypotheses on the likes of value proposition, customer segments, and
channels been validated through face-to-face customer interaction?
Customer-validation questions might include: average order size,
customer lifetime value, average time to first order, rate of sales pipeline
growth, improvement in close rate, and revenue per salesperson.
In addition to the startup metrics above, the relatively few financial
metrics that a startup board should be tracking are cash-burn rate, number of
months’ worth of cash left, short-term hiring plans, and amount of time until
the company reaches cash-flow break-even.
Make sure decisions are fact-based, not faith-based.
 
Rule No. 9:
Fast Decision-Making, Cycle Time, Speed and
Tempo
Speed matters at startups where the only absolute certainty is that the bank
balance declines every day. While 
Rule No. 4
 addresses iterations and pivots,
it doesn’t specify how long they should take. Unequivocally, the faster the
better, since the 
faster these “learn, build, pivot” or “iterate, build” cycles
happen, the greater the odds of finding a scalable business model with the
cash on hand. If cycles happen too slowly, the startup runs out of cash and
dies. The biggest impediment to cycle time is psychological: it requires the
admission of being wrong or even of suffering a short-term tactical defeat.
While pivots and iterations are about speed outside the building, speed
also matters inside the company. Most startup decisions are made in the face
of uncertainty. There’s seldom a clear-cut, perfect solution to any
engineering, customer or competitor problem, and founders shouldn’t
agonize over trying to find one. This doesn’t mean gambling with the
company’s fortunes on a whim. It means adopting plans with an acceptable
degree of risk and doing so quickly. (Make sure these decisions are fact-
based, not faith-based.) In general, the company that consistently makes and
implements decisions rapidly gains a tremendous, often-decisive competitive
advantage.
...startups should make reversible decisions before
anyone leaves the CEO’s office.
 
Startup decisions have two states: 
reversible and irreversible
. A
reversible decision could be adding or dropping a product feature or a new
algorithm in the code or targeting a specific set of customers. If the decision
proves a bad one, it can be unwound in a reasonable period of time. An
irreversible decision such as firing an employee, launching a product, or
signing a long lease on expensive office space is usually difficult or
impossible to reverse.
Startups should as policy, 
make reversible decisions before anyone
leaves the CEO’s office
 or before a meeting ends. Perfect decision-making is
both unimportant and impossible, and what matters more is forward
momentum and a tight, fact-based feedback loop to quickly recognize and
reverse bad decisions. By the time a big company gets the committee to get
the subcommittee to pick a meeting date, most startups have made 20
decisions, reversed five, and implemented the other 15.
Learning to make decisions quickly is just part of the equation. Agile
startups have mastered another trick: tempo—the ability to make quick
decisions consistently and at all levels in the company. Speed and tempo are
integral parts of startup DNA, and a great startup’s tempo is often 10 times
that of a large company.
Rule No. 10:
It’s All About Passion
A startup without driven, passionate people is dead the day it opens its doors.
“Startup people” are different
. They think different. In contrast, most people
are great at execution. They work to live, do their jobs well, and enjoy their
family, their lives, their hobbies and often even enjoy mowing the lawn.
They’re terrific at executing fixed tasks, and it’s a wonderful life for almost
everyone.
The people leading almost every successful startup in history are just
different. They’re a very tiny percentage of the world population, and their
brains are wired for chaos, uncertainty, and blinding speed. They’re
irrationally focused on customer needs and delivering great products. Their
job is their life. It’s not 9-to-5, it’s 24/7. These are the people who found
high-growth, highly-successful scalable startups.
Startups demand execs who are comfortable with
uncertainty, chaos and change.
 
Rule No. 11:
Startup Job Titles Are Very Different from a Large
Company’s
In an existing company, job titles reflect the way tasks are organized to
execute a known business model. For example, the “Sales” title in an existing
company means there’s a sales team repeatedly selling a known product to a
well-understood group of customers, using a standard corporate presentation
with an 
existing price list and standard terms, conditions and contract. The
“Sales” title in an existing company is all about execution around a series of
knowns.
Compared with big companies, startups need executives whose skills are
180 degrees different. 
Startups demand execs who are comfortable with
uncertainty, chaos and change
—with presentations and offers changing
daily, with the product changing often, with probing and gaining insights
from failure rather than high-fiving a success. In short, they need the rare
breed:
open to learning and discovery—highly curious, inquisitive, and creative
eager to search for a repeatable and scalable business model
agile enough to deal with daily change and operating “without a map”
readily able to wear multiple hats, often on the same day
comfortable celebrating failure when it leads to learning and iteration
We suggest replacing traditional execution-oriented sales, marketing and
business development titles with a single title: the Customer Development
team. At first, this “team” will consist of the company’s founder(s), who talks
with customers to gain enough insights to develop the minimum viable
product. Later, as the startup moves into customer validation, the team may
grow to include a dedicated “sales closer” responsible for the logistics of
getting early orders signed. The closer shouldn’t be confused with a
traditional sales VP. To succeed in this process, the team must have:
the ability to listen to customer objections and understand whether they
are issues about the product, the presentation, the pricing or something
else (or the wrong type of customer)
experience in talking to and moving between customers and engineers
confidence amid a state of constant change, often operating “without a
map”
the ability to walk in their customers’ shoes, understanding how they
work and the problems they face
Some would say this checklist isn’t bad for identifying great entrepreneurs.
Rule No. 12:
Preserve All Cash Until Needed. Then Spend.
The goal of Customer Development is not to avoid spending money but to
preserve cash while 
searching for the repeatable and scalable business
model
. Once found, then spend like there’s no tomorrow
. This paragraph is
worth deconstructing:
Preserve cash:
 When a startup has unlimited cash (Internet bubbles,
frothy venture climate), it can iterate on its mistakes by burning more dollars.
When money is tight, without dollars to redo mistakes, it’s crucial to
minimize waste. The Customer Development process preserves cash by not
hiring any sales and marketing staff until the founders turn hypotheses into
facts and discover a viable product/market fit.
While searching:
 Customer Development observes that at the start, the
company and its business model are based solely on hypotheses, not facts,
and that the founders need to get out of the building to turn these hypotheses
into customer data. This “get out of the building” approach, combined with
rapid iteration and pivots, is central to the model’s customer discovery and
validation steps.
...preserve cash while searching for the repeatable
and scalable business model...
 
Repeatable:
 Startups may get orders that stem from board members’
customer relationships, engineering one-offs, or heroic single-shot efforts by
the CEO. These are great, but they aren’t repeatable by a sales organization.
Search not for the one-off revenue hits but rather for a pattern that can be
replicated by a sales organization selling off a price list or by customers
regularly visiting the website.
Scalable:
 The goal is not to get one customer but many—and for each
additional customer to add incremental revenue 
and
 profit. The test is: Does
the addition of one more salesperson or more marketing dollars bring in more
gross profit (or users or clicks) than you invested? Who influences a sale?
Who recommends a sale? 
Who is the decision-maker? Who is the economic
buyer? Where’s the budget for purchasing this type of product? What’s the
customer acquisition cost? Affirming the 
repeatable, scalable sales model
 is
the customer validation step of Customer Development, its most important
phase. Has the team learned how to sell a target customer? Can this happen
before the startup runs out of money?
Search not for the one-off revenue hits but rather
for a pattern...
 
Business model:
 A business model answers the basic questions of how
the company makes money. Is this a revenue play, or is it a freemium model
seeking users? Something else? Who’s the customer?
Spend like there’s no tomorrow:
 The goal of an investor-backed startup
is not to build a lifestyle business. The goal is to reach venture scale (10
times the return on investment or more). When management and board agree
that they’ve found a repeatable and scalable sales model (i.e., have a
product/market fit), 
then invest the dollars to create end-user demand and
drive those customers into the sales channel
.
Rule No. 13:
Communicate and Share Learning
An integral part of Customer Development’s “learning and discovery”
philosophy is 
sharing everything that’s learned outside the building
 with
employees, co-founders and even investors.
The traditional way to do this is via weekly company meetings to keep
employees informed and board meetings to let the investors understand the
progress made in the search for the business model. But technology in the
21st-century has taken us to places we never could get to before. We can now
communicate all we’re learning in near-real time to everyone who needs to
know.
We strongly recommend that the founders keep and share all their
activities in the customer discovery step via a blog, CRM or product
management tool. A powerful tool to help founding team members and their
investors and advisors communicate about progress in evolving their business
model and sharing or discussing customer discovery has been developed in
concert with the authors and can be found at 
LaunchPadCentral.com
. It
records hypotheses the startup started with, who the team has talked to, the
questions asked, the tests conducted, what’s been learned, and questions for
advisors or investors. While this may seem burdensome, it takes less time
than having a weekly coffee with an advisory board member. What results is
a communications tool allowing outsiders to view the company’s progress up
close and to offer suggestions and course corrections.
Rule No. 14:
Customer Development Success Begins With Buy-
In
Customer Development’s “learning and discovery” philosophy can be
immensely disorienting to a founder, engineer or investor who has spent his
or her career 
executing a plan.
 For Customer Development to succeed,
everyone on the team—from investor or parent company to engineers,
marketeers and founders—needs to understand and agree that the Customer
Development process is different to its core. If the engineering VP is talking
waterfall development or the board demands a rigid timetable, Customer
Development is destined for disaster. Everyone must accept the process,
recognizing that this is a fluid, nonlinear 
search for a business model
 that can
sometimes last for years.
The Customer Development process is different to
its core.
 
Customer Development changes almost every aspect of startup behavior,
performance, metrics, and, as often as not, success potential. It’s not just a
“nice to do” while executing the revenue model in the back of the business
plan. Customer Development 
reinvents the business model on the fly,
iterating often and pivoting 
whenever indicated. Founders need to have the
commitment of the team 
and board
 before embarking on Customer
Development. Ensure that all understand and agree that it’s iterative,
necessary, and worthwhile and that it changes the benchmarks and metrics
along the way.
Comments such as “The product is already spec’ed, and we can’t change
the features since development is already underway,” or “We already have
the factory (or sales team or marketing materials) built,” or “We have to
launch to make the numbers in the plan,” are all red flags. To succeed at
Customer Development, the company must abandon the old model’s
emphasis on execution of a fantasy business plan. Instead it must commit to a
Customer Development process stressing learning, discovery, failure, and
iteration in the search for a successful business model. If you’re ready for this
process, this book will tell you how to do it.
Summary: The Customer Development
Process
The Customer Development process reflects the best practices of winning
startups. It is the only approach for web-based businesses where failure is
certain without constant customer feedback and product iteration as they
search for their audiences. Customer Development’s fast cycle times and
inherent cash conservation gives all entrepreneurs more chances to pivot,
iterate, and succeed before the bank account runs dry. Describe this model to
entrepreneurs who have taken companies all the way to a lucrative exit and
beyond, and heads nod in recognition.
While each step has its own specific objectives, the process as a whole
has one overarching goal: discovering the repeatable, scalable, and ultimately
profitable business before running out of cash. This transforms the company
from a set of founding hypotheses into a moneymaking endeavor.
Customer Development is damn hard work. You
can’t fake it.
 
Customer Development is damn hard work. You can’t fake it. You can’t
just do the slides or “do” the process in a weekend. It’s a full-time, full-body-
contact sport. It’s a long-term commitment to changing the way a startup is
built. But it’s also proven to increase the chances of startup success.
Checklist 1: Board And Management Buy-In
Goal:
 Agreement among investors, founders, and team on commitment to the
Customer Development process.
Reference
: Chapter 1, Manifesto Rule #14
     
  Commit to use of Business Model and Market Type.
     
  Understand the difference between “search” for a business model and
“execute” a business plan
     
  Learn differences between Product Development and Customer
Development
     
  Discuss number of “funded Pivots” available and how board and team
will measure company progress
Customer Development process emphasizes learning and discovery
     
  Is there board and founding team buy-in for this process?
     
  Is there is enough funding for 2 to 3 Pivots in Discovery and
Validation?
Discuss Market Type (initial decision)
     
  Existing, Resegmented, New or Clone?
     
  First pass with board on initial agreement of Market Type
     
  First pass with board on different funding needs by Market Type
Agree on Customer Development Time Frame
     
  Approximate time for Discovery and Validation
     
  Discovery exit criteria determined
     
  Validation exit criteria determined
Exit Criteria:
     
  Buy-in of the team and board for Customer Development process
     
  Market Type and exit criteria for each step
Checklist 2: The Customer Development Team
Goal
: Set up the Customer Development Team.
Reference:
 Chapter 1, Manifesto Rule #1
Review the organizational differences between Customer Development
and the traditional product introduction process
     
  Founders spend time outside the building
     
  No VP of Sales or Marketing
     
  Initial team responsibilities
Team Setup and Goals
     
  Agree on who leads the team
     
  Agree on the “getting out of the building” methodology
     
  Agree on % of customer feedback online versus eyeball
     
  Agree on the team roles for each of the four Customer Development
Steps
Enumerate 3 to 5 Core Values of the Founding Team
     
  Not a mission statement
     
  Not about profit or products
     
  Core ideology is about what the company believes in
Exit Criteria
:
     
  Buy-in of the team and board for a customer development team
     
  Are the right people in those jobs?
II
Step One: Customer Discovery
Chapter 2:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
Chapter 3:
Customer Discovery, Phase One:
State Your Business Model Hypotheses
Chapter 4:
Customer Discovery, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do People Care?”
Chapter 5:
Customer Discovery, Phase Three:
“Get Out of the Building” and Test the Product Solution
Chapter 6:
Customer Discovery, Phase Four:
Verify the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
Overview of the Customer Discovery Process


CHAPTER 2
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
No startup business plan survives first contact with customers.
—Steve Blank
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.
—Lao Tzu
I
RIDIUM WAS ONE OF THE BIGGEST STARTUP
 gambles ever made—a bold and
audacious $5.2 billion bet. Founded by Motorola and a global partnership of
18 companies in 1991, Iridium planned to build a mobile telephone system
that would work “anywhere on Earth,” from ships in the middle of the ocean
to the jungles of Africa to remote mountain peaks where no cell towers
existed.
How? With an out-of-this-world business plan. First, the company
bought a fleet of 15 rockets from Russia, the U.S. and China. Next, it
launched an armada of 72 private satellites into orbit, where they acted like
500-mile-high cell towers providing phone coverage to any spot on Earth.
Seven years after Iridium’s founding, its satellites were in place. But nine
months after the first call was made in 1998, the company was in Chapter 11
bankruptcy. When Iridium crashed back to Earth, it ranked as one of the
largest startup failures on record. What went wrong?
When Iridium was founded in 1991, worldwide cell-phone coverage was
sparse, unreliable and expensive. Cell-phone handsets were the size of lunch
boxes. Iridium put together a business plan that made assumptions about
customers, their problems and the product needed to solve those problems.
Other assumptions about sales channel, partnerships, and revenue model all
added up to a set of financial forecasts that Iridium would soon be printing
money.

One of the largest startup failures on record as they
executed their business plan.
 
But in the seven-plus years it took Iridium to go from concept to launch,
innovation in mobile- and cell-phone networks moved at blinding speed. By
the time Iridium launched, there were far fewer places on the planet where
cell-phone service was unavailable. Traditional cell-phone companies
provided coverage in the most valuable parts of the world. Prices for cell
service shrunk as fast as phone handsets did. In contrast, Iridium’s satellite
phone was bigger than a brick and weighed about as much. Worse, Iridium’s
cell phone couldn’t make calls from cars or buildings, since it required line-
of-sight “connection” to the satellites. Instead of 50 cents per minute for a
regular cell call, Iridium’s calls cost $7 a minute, plus $3,000 for the handset
itself.
Iridium’s potential market shrunk nearly every day. Instead of a massive
worldwide market of potential users, it had drawn only a small group willing
to pay 
its prices and put up with the product’s many limitations. But
Iridium’s business model assumptions and plans were firmly fixed as if it was
still 1991. The company spent $5 billion building a business over eight years
without ever focusing on four key questions:
Have we identified a problem a customer wants to see solved?
Does our product solve this customer problem or need?
If so, do we have a viable and profitable business model?
Have we learned enough to go out and sell?
Answering these questions is the purpose of the first step in the
customer discovery process. This chapter explains how to go about it.
(Twenty years later, Iridium emerged from bankruptcy. In 2000, an
investor group bought $6 billion worth of its assets for $25 million. After a
long climb back, the company celebrated its 500,000
th
 customer in September
2011.)
Customers don’t behave like your business plan.
 
The Customer Discovery Philosophy
A startup begins with the vision of its founders: a vision of a new product or
service that solves a customer’s problems or needs and of how it will reach
its many customers. Customer discovery lowers the odds of spending zillions
and getting zeros in return as the Iridium team did. So the No. 1 goal of
customer discovery amounts to this: turning the founders’ initial hypotheses
about their market and customers into facts.
Get Out of the Building
Facts exist only outside the building
, where customers live, so the most
important aspect of customer discovery is getting out of the building, in front
of customers. And not for a few days or a week, but repeatedly, over weeks if
not months. This critical task can’t be assigned to junior staffers and must be
driven by founders. Only after the founders have performed this step will
they know whether they have a valid vision or just a hallucination.
Sounds simple, doesn’t it? But for anyone who has worked in
established companies, the customer discovery process is disorienting. All the
rules about new-product management in large companies are turned upside
down. It’s instructive to enumerate all things you are 
not
 going to do:
understand the needs and wants of 
all
 customers
make a list of 
all
 the features customers want before they buy your
product
hand Product Development a features list of the sum of 
all
 customer
requests
hand Product Development a detailed marketing-requirements document
run focus groups and test customers’ reactions to your product to see if
they will buy
What you 
are
 going to do is develop your product for the few, not the
many. Moreover, you’re going to start building your product even before you
know whether you have any customers for it.
On a startups first day, there’s limited—if any—
customer input.
 
For an experienced marketing or product management executive, these
ideas are not only disorienting and counterintuitive but heretical. Why aren’t
the needs of 
all
 potential customers important? What is it about a first
product from a new 
company that’s different from follow-on products in a
large company? What is it about a startup’s first customers that make the
rules so different?
Search for the Problem/Solution Fit
The customer discovery process searches for problem/solution fit: “have we
found a problem lots of people want us to solve (or a need they want us to
fill)” and “does our solution (a product, a website, or an app) solve the
problem in a compelling way?” At its core, the essence of customer discovery
is to determine whether your startup’s value proposition matches the
customer segment it plans to target.
Problem/solution fit is virtually identical to what’s sometimes called
“product/ market fit,” as the previous paragraph indicates. As a result, 
we use
the terms somewhat interchangeably
 throughout the book. Do realize,
however, that in multi-sided markets, there may be multiple value
propositions and multiple customer segments. But problem/solution fit is
only achieved when the revenue model, pricing, and customer acquisition
efforts all match up with the customers’ needs.
Develop the Product for the Few, Not the Many
In existing companies, the goal of traditional product management and
marketing is to develop a market-requirements document (MRD) for
engineering that contains the sum of 
all
 possible customer feature requests,
prioritized in a collaborative effort among Product Management, Marketing,
Sales, and Engineering. Marketing or Product Management hosts focus
groups, analyzes sales data from the field, and looks at customer feature
requests and complaints. This information leads to the adding of requested
features to the product specification, and the engineering team builds them
into the next product release.
While this process is rational for an established company entering an
existing market, it’s folly for startups. Why? Startups aren’t small versions of
large, existing companies where there’s plenty of customer knowledge and
input. In established companies, the MRD process ensures that engineering
will build a product that appeals to existing customers in a known market,
where customers and their needs are known. On a startup’s first day, there’s
limited—if any—customer input for creating a formal product specification.
In a startup, the first product is not designed to satisfy a mainstream
customer. No startup can afford to build a product with every feature a
mainstream customer needs all at once. The product would take years to get
to market and be obsolete by the time it arrived. Instead, successful startups
solve this conundrum by focusing development and early selling efforts on a
very small group of early customers who have bought into the startup’s
vision. These visionary customers will give the company the feedback
necessary to add features to the product over time.
Earlyvangelists are willing to make a leap of faith
and buy an early product.
 
Earlyvangelists
: The Most Important Customers of
All
Enthusiasts who spread the good news about your product to friends, family
or co-workers are often called evangelists. But a new word is needed to
describe the early adopters—the visionary customers—who buy unfinished
and untested products, because they want to “first,” whether it’s for the sake
of gaining a competitive edge or winning bragging rights. We call these early
adopters 
earlyvangelists
. Unlike “mainstream” business or consumer-product
customers who want to buy a finished, completed, tested product,
earlyvangelists are willing to make a leap of faith and buy an early product
from a startup. Every industry has a small subset of visionaries willing to take
a leap of faith on an early product.
One of the mistakes that startup founders make is to give away or
heavily discount early alpha/beta products to blue-chip customers. In single-
sided markets (where the user is the payer) earlyvangelists will be happy to
pay for early access to the product.
 If they won’t, they aren’t earlyvangelists.
Their willingness to pay is a critical part of the customer discovery process.
You’ll use it to test the entire buying process.

Earlyvangelist Characteristics
 (Figure 2.1)
 In web/mobile apps, where multi-sided markets (separate users and
payers) are often found, earlyvangelists can be users or payers. But even as
nonpaying users, 
these earlyvangelists are willing or eager accelerators of
your viral growth.
Earlyvangelists are willing or eager accelerators of
your viral growth.
 
In both physical and web/mobile channels, earlyvangelists display these
common characteristics (see 
Figure 2.1
):
They have a problem or need.
They understand they have a problem.
They’re actively searching for a solution and have a timetable for
finding it.
The problem is so painful that they’ve cobbled together an interim
solution.
They’ve committed, or can quickly acquire, budget dollars to purchase.
Think of earlyvangelists’ characteristics along a scale of customer pain.
Earlyvangelist customers will be found only at the top of the scale—those
who have already been looking for a solution, built a home-grown solution
(whether in a company by building a software solution or at home by taping
together a fork, a light bulb and a vacuum cleaner) and have or can acquire a
budget. These people are perfect earlyvangelist candidates. They can be
relied on for feedback and initial sales; they’ll tell others about the product
and spread the word that the vision is real. Moreover, they can be potential
advisory board candidates (more about advisory boards in 
Chapter 5
).
Build a Minimum Viable Product (
MVP
) First
The idea that a startup builds its product for a small group of initial customers
rather than devising a generic mainstream spec is radical. What follows is
equally revolutionary.
The goal of the MVP is to build the smallest possible
feature set.
 
On the day the company starts, there is very limited customer input. All
the startup has is a vision of what the problem, product and solution seem to
be. Unfortunately, it’s either a vision or a hallucination. The company doesn’t
know who its initial customers are or what features they’ll want. One option
is to start developing an entire full-featured first release of the product, with
every feature the founders can think of. We now know this results in wasted
engineering effort, time and cash, as customers don’t use, want or need most
of the features developed without their input.
Another path is to put Product Development on hold until the Customer
Development team can find customers who can provide adequate feedback.
The risk here is lost time and no product for customers to provide feedback
against. A third, more productive approach is to develop the core features of
the product (incrementally and iteratively with agile engineering methods),
with the feature list driven by the vision and experience of the company’s
founders. 
This is a minimum viable product.
The goal of customer discovery is to test your understanding of the
customer’s problem and see if your proposed solution will prompt him to use
or buy the product based on its most important features alone. Most users
want finished products, but earlyvangelists are the perfect target for the MVP.
Tailor the initial product release to satisfy their needs. If no one thinks your
MVP solution is interesting or sufficient, iterate or pivot until an adequate
number say “yes.”
The shift in thinking to an incremental and iterative MVP as opposed to
a fully featured first product release is important. Engineers tend to make a
product bigger and more perfect. The MVP helps them focus the most
important and indispensable features. Your goal in having an MVP is not to
gather feature requests to change the product or to make the feature set larger.
Instead, the goal is to put the MVP in front of customers to find out whether
you understood the customer problem well enough to define key elements of
the solution. Then you iteratively refine the solution. If, and only if, no
customers can be found for the most important features of the MVP, bring
customers’ additional feature requests to the product development team. In
the Customer Development model, feature requests to an MVP are by
exception and iteration rather than by rule. This eliminates the endless list of
feature requests that often delay first customer ship and drive product
development teams crazy.
 MVPs for Web/Mobile Are Different
Web/mobile businesses conduct customer discovery differently from those in
the physical channel. They can reach hundreds or thousands more customers
by combining online and face-to-face interactions. They place a greater
emphasis on customer acquisition, activation, and referrals. Web/mobile
minimum viable products can be developed faster and delivered earlier,
accelerating the discovery process. When delivered, they can conduct more
tests with customers, with more granular customer-response data. This results
in a faster iteration of the problem statement, the proposed solution, and the
MVP itself.
For web/mobile startups, here’s how the MVP is used in the discovery
process:
Developing the Minimum Viable Product for a Web/Mobile Product
(Figure 2.2)
Use the Business Model Canvas as The Customer
Discovery Scorecard
Often there’s a lack of a shared and clear understanding of the business
model throughout the company. This customer discovery step uses Alexander
Osterwalder’s 
business model canvas
 to diagrammatically illustrate how a
company intends to make money. As shown in 
Figure 2.3
 the canvas
represents any company in nine boxes, depicting the details of a company’s
product, customers, channels, demand creation, revenue models, partners,
resources, activities and cost structure. (We described the business model
canvas in detail in the 
Customer Development Manifesto
.)
Business Model Canvas
 (Figure 2.3)
In this phase you’ll develop a one- or two-page brief about each of the
following boxes in the business model canvas:
Market Size: how big the opportunity is
Value Proposition, Part 1: the product/service, its benefits and minimum
viable product
Customer Segments: who the customer is and what problems the
product solves
Channels: how the product will be distributed and sold
Customer Relationships: how demand will be created
Value Proposition, Part 2: market-type hypothesis and competitive set/
differentiation
Key Resources: suppliers, commodities, or other essential elements of
the business
Key Partners: other enterprises essential to success of the business
Revenue Streams: revenue and profit sources and size
When you first draft your initial hypotheses your canvas begins to fill
up, looking like 
Figure 2.4
.
Sample Business Model Canvas—Initial Hypotheses
 (Figure 2.4)
But in addition to using the business model canvas as a static snapshot
of the business at a single moment, frozen in time, Customer Development
uses the canvas as a “scorecard” to track progress in searching for a business
model.
Once a week update the canvas to reflect any pivots or iterations,
highlighting in red the changes from the last week.
Then after you and your team agree on the changes to your business
model, integrate them into what becomes your new canvas for the week (the
accepted changes in red are then shown in black). During the next week any
new changes are again shown in red. Then the process repeats each week –
new changes showing up in red. Then a new canvas used for the week.
This method highlights the changes over time for your and the team’s
reference. 
Figure 2.5
 shows how the canvases will look over time.
Using the Business Model Canvas as a Weekly Scorecard
 (Figure 2.5)
Had they read this book, and gotten out of the building, the folks at
Iridium might have saved billions by learning just how small the market for
their business had become. It would have allowed them to search for
alternatives and survival.
To sum up the customer discovery philosophy:
 whether there’s
product/market fit by finding earlyvangelists, understanding their needs, and
verifying that the initial minimum viable product solves a problem they’ll
eagerly pay to have solved. And if not, use near-continuous customer
feedback to drive agile, frequent changes in product and business model
alike.
As you complete the hypothesis development, your business model
canvas quickly becomes multi-dimensional. You are really developing three
initial canvases:
Core elements of the business model itself (value proposition, channel,
etc.)
Hypotheses you have for each element of the business model (such as
“people will want these features, “or “customers will buy our product
because...”)
And a layer outlining the key pass/fail tests you will use to get face-to-
face with customers and use their feedback to convert your hypotheses
into facts.
Overview of Customer Discovery
Customer Discovery: Overview of the Process
 (Figure 2.6)
Customer Discovery has Four Phases
Phase 1
 deconstructs the founders’ vision into the nine parts of the business
model canvas (product, customers, channels, demand creation, revenue
models, partners, resources, activities and cost structure). Then your team
writes one-page briefs about each of the hypotheses, including the list of
experiments or tests you’ll need to conduct to prove or disprove each one.
In Phase 2
 you conduct experiments to test your “problem” hypotheses. This
helps you understand how important the problem is and how big it can
become. You do so by testing most elements of the business model, including
the value proposition, pricing, channel strategy, and sales process. Your goal
is to turn hypotheses into facts or discard them if they’re wrong, and replace
them with new hypotheses. In the process, you’ll gain a deep understanding
of customers’ business, workflow, organization, and product needs. When all
the facts are in, update your results on the canvas.
 Web-based products and channels often implement much of Phase 2
online in near-real time.
In Phase 3
, you test your “solution,” presenting your value proposition
(product, pricing, features, and other business model components) and the
minimum viable product to customers and compare their responses to the
“pass/fail” goals you developed earlier. 
 For a web-based product, the
MVP is a live site, a live demo, or a feature or piece of functionality or
content.
 The goal is not to sell the product, but to validate how well you
understood the problem in Phase 2 when you heard customers say, “Even
these minimum features solve our problems,” or, “I need this product.”
Ideally, customers ask, “When can I get it?”
 Online, customers should engage and interact, spend time on it or
with it, appear in droves, come back again and again, and bring their friends.
In Phase 4
 you stop and assess the results of the experiments you’ve
conducted and verify that you have:
a full understanding of customers’ problems, passions, or needs
confirmed the value proposition solves problems, passions or needs
determined that a sizable volume of customers exists for the product
learned what customers will pay for the product
made certain the resulting revenue should deliver a profitable business
With your product features and business model validated, decide
whether you have learned enough to go out and try to sell a select your
product to a few visionary customers, or whether you need to go back to
customers to learn some more. If, and only if, you are successful in this step
do you proceed to customer validation.
That’s customer discovery in a nutshell. The remainder of this section
details each of the phases just described.
Now let’s get started.

CHAPTER 3
Customer Discovery, Phase One: State
Your Business Model Hypotheses
T
HE DIAGRAM ABOVE IS AN OVERVIEW OF
 P
HASE
 1
 of customer discovery.
Note that hypotheses for physical products often differ from web/mobile
products. Where the hypothesis issues differ, each is described separately,
physical startups in the upper, lighter-tinted row and web/mobile startup
considerations in the lower, darker row.
This phase starts by developing a rough market size estimate to size the
opportunity for your new venture. Next, the rest of customer discovery uses
the business model canvas to record short summaries (
hypothesis briefs
) of
initial hypotheses about your business. The canvas provides a picture of the
business model on a single page, serving as a reference for team members
and a scorecard keeping track of pivots and iterations as the company’s
business model changes.
The hypothesis briefs provide the detail, but remain short and to the
point, with enough clarity to ensure that all team members understand their
meaning. No hypothesis brief should be more than two pages, and as a rule,
bullet points are far more helpful than paragraphs or even sentences. Almost
every hypothesis concludes with the experiments you’ll use in phases 
2
 and
3
, when you’re out of the building talking to customers to prove or disprove
the hypothesis. Sometimes you’ll even need to get out of the building to do
some research just to figure out what tests to conduct and the kinds of results
to shoot for.
Initially, some briefs may seem shockingly empty. Not to worry—these
briefs serve as an outline. The team will return to them often, filling in the
blanks and modifying original hypotheses with new facts learned along the
way.
Market Size Hypothesis
This brief is an outlier—it doesn’t directly map onto the business model
canvas. But because there’s nothing worse than spending years in a startup
only to discover that it can never grow to more than a few million dollars in
revenue, the market size hypotheses help you size the opportunity of your
startup market. Estimating market size helps determine whether the payoff
from your new venture is worth the toil, sweat and tears, or whether you’re
about to do your first pivot.
Aligning investor and founder objectives clearly at the outset is good
“life insurance” for founders, since few disconnects cost founders their jobs
more quickly than disputes over goals and gold.
...few disconnects cost founders their jobs more
quickly than disputes over goals and gold.
 
The thinking applies regardless of whether it’s in the physical or
web/mobile channel. With one exception: buyable startups founded for a fast
sale to a larger-platform player like Facebook or Google. Buyable startups
should consider the size of what ís often a microsegment of a large market.
Market opportunities are fueled by three ingredients: a large number of
potential active users or customers, clear future-user growth in a market with
rapid and predictable growth, and the opportunity to attract active customers
or users.
TAM, SAM and Target Market
Marketers and their investors typically think of market size as three numbers;
TAM (total addressable market), SAM (served available market) and target
market. The TAM for makers of a new smartphone app might be the 1 billion
total smartphone owners worldwide, but if the application is available only in
English or works only on an iPhone, the SAM or potential market served is
far smaller. And the target market might be Apple App Store customers, so
your next step would be to estimate what percentage of those shoppers might
actually buy. Each estimate further narrows the target market.
TAM
 = how big is the universe
SAM
 = how many can I reach with my sales channel
Target Market
 
(for a startup)
 
=
 who will be the most likely buyers
TAM, SAM and Target Market
 (Figure 3.1)
Estimating TAM and SAM and target market is a good starting point for
the market size hypothesis. Customers will help turn these hypotheses into
facts.
A top-down estimate is a first step. Use industry-analyst reports, market-
research reports, competitors’ press releases, university libraries—and
discussions with investors and customers to “size” the overall market. Use
whatever metric is most appropriate—units, dollars, page views, eyeballs,
whatever.
A note of caution: First-time entrepreneurs are seduced by market size
data from research firms. They should keep in mind that market research
firms are excellent at predicting the past. (If they were geniuses at predicting
the future, they’d be running hedge funds.)
Therefore, a bottom-up estimate is usually more realistic for startups.
Toy makers, for example do this quite easily: there are roughly 2 million girls
born in the U.S. each year, and half can’t afford a $90 doll, so the U.S. target
market for a new doll for girls age 6 to 8 is at most 3 million.
Market research firms are great at predicting the
past.
 
In assessing an 
existing
 or 
re-segmented market
, be sure to consider the
adjacent markets that customers might switch from. Millions of BlackBerry
users traded in their RIM devices when Apple’s iPhone arrived, for example.
Will the startup’s new product have the competitive power to encourage
switching? Count only the switchable subset and beware of long-term
contracts, service contracts, and “sunk costs” like training or installation, all
of which are often hidden barriers to switching.
Of course, nobody can compute a 
new market’s
 size today, since it
doesn’t exist yet. What to do? Estimate the opportunity based on proxies and
adjacent markets. See if there are any comparable companies. Have others
grown as fast as the estimate? Why will this startup perform similarly?
 Sizing the web/mobile market
While some like to quote web/mobile market sizes in terms of eyeballs, page
views, downloads, referrals, or hours, at the end of the day it’s still about
revenue. What confuses new entrepreneurs is that web/mobile markets may
be multi-sided—the users (who may not pay) may be measured in eyeballs,
page views, downloads, referrals, or hours, but there had better be payers
who offer dollars for access to those users.
For example, market size could be calculated by multiplying the number
of eyeballs by the dollars that each eyeball is worth to a payer.
Gathering a massive, growing audience efficiently and cost-effectively
is job No. 1 for most web/mobile products (e-commerce is often an
exception, as are niche vertical sites). This is the time to develop an initial
hypothesis about where that audience might come from and how big it can
become. At this stage, most web/mobile startups follow the
Google/Facebook/YouTube strategy: gather a (hopefully massive) audience
first and be sure it “sticks.” Monetize it later.
Gathering a massive, growing audience efficiently
and cost-effectively is job No. 1.
 
Calculating the audience without understanding who will pay money to
access that audience is a mistake. In a multi-sided market, you need to
estimate all sides of the market, particularly the side that will pay.
An easy way to gauge the “size” of a web market involves the free use
of Google tools. Brainstorm all the keywords that prospective customers
might use to find your product or site—“multiplayer monster games,”
“computer games with monsters,” “creatures and online games” and on and
on. The Google keyword tool summarizes how many people are searching for
each keyword. Make some allowances for overlap or duplication in a month
and this is yet another way to develop an estimate of market size. It’s
especially effective at identifying whether you’re in a market that’s too small
to pursue—one where the total number of searches is measured in thousands,
for example.
Another way to approach the market-sizing question is the “30/10/10”
law of web/mobile “physics,” first posited by leading venture capitalist Fred
Wilson. Wilson observed that, across his entire portfolio of mobile apps,
games, social and music services, this law applies consistently:
Thirty percent of registered users and those downloading mobile apps
will use the service each month.
Ten percent of registered users and those downloading mobile apps will
use the service each day.
Concurrent users of a real-time service will seldom exceed 10 percent of
the number of daily users.
Industry research will also help immensely in the market-sizing
exercise. Learn how to research your market in 
Phase 2, Customer
Understanding
, which describes web-specific research tools and tactics.
Checklist 3: Market Size
Goal
: Estimate the total market opportunity for the company
Reference
: Chapter 3, Market Size Hypothesis
Estimated market size:
     
  TAM or Total Available Market
     
  SAM or Served Available Market
     
  Target Market
Estimate current product and follow-on products
     
  Appropriate metric for measuring determined
          
  Units/dollars/page views/other measures?
          
  Per member for subscription services/per page view for advertising-
supported businesses?
     
  Research conducted to “size” the overall market
          
  Read industry analyst reports, market research reports, competitors’
press releases, etc.
          
  Talk with investors and customers
     
  If assessing an existing or resegmented market, adjacent markets that
customers might switch from are considered
          
  Will the startup’s product encourage switching?
          
  Only the switchable subset counted (Beware of long-term lock-ins
from incumbents)
          
  Growth computed for all customer sources over 3-5 years
     
  If assessing a new market, the opportunities are estimated based on
proxies and adjacent markets
          
  Are there comparable companies?
          
  Have others grown as fast as the estimate?
          
  Why will this company perform similarly?
Exit criteria
:
  Written sense of market size, estimate of how much the company can
capture
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Value Proposition 1: “Low Fidelity” MVP
Hypothesis
 The MVP brief is a concise summary of the low fidelity web/mobile
features that will work as a stand-alone product.
The first two MVP steps—crafting the company’s long-term vision and
listing the product’s features and benefits—are virtually identical to those
outlined in the following Physical MVP section
, so they aren’t repeated here
.
Review those steps and develop those hypothesis statements before starting
here.
The low fidelity MVP tests whether you’ve
accurately identified a problem that customers care
about.
 
In web/mobile channels, the MVP plays an even more important role
than it does in the physical channel. It exposes the product to prospects as
early as possible, even as continuous deployment adds new features,
functionality or graphics. A low fidelity MVP can be as simple as a single
web page used to gather customer feedback about the problem the product
will solve. For web-based startups using agile development and continuous
deployment, the delivery date for the low fidelity MVP is basically Day One.
Ideally, though, it’s a snapshot of the product as it exists on that day in the
agile development process, in its “quick and dirty” form, even though that
form will evolve almost every day.
Even the earliest MVP versions should include some way for interested
users to register or self-identify, typically by leaving their e-mail addresses to
receive updates. These early users will be helpful throughout the customer
discovery process and beyond.
Web/Mobile channels will test both a low fidelity and a 
hi-fidelity MVP
.
The low- and hi-fidelity MVPs are used very differently: the low fidelity
MVP tests whether you’ve accurately 
identified a problem that customers
care about
 (based on user visits to your site, e-mail received, demos played,
etc.), while the hi-fidelity MVP, detailed in 
Phase 3
, will later test whether
the product is on the right path to solving that problem (based on orders
received, users’ stays on the site, users’ recommendations to others, etc.).
Later, during customer validation, when the hi-fidelity MVP is exposed to
many more customers, it should look and operate much more like a finished
product. Taken together, the low and high fidelity MVP tests help establish
product/market fit.
Write a User Story instead of a Feature List
A “user story” is important in web/mobile channels, where intense
competition and millions of online products and properties often make
product differentiation harder to “nail.” For example: There are thousands of
websites for nurses, and a user story can help explain the need for a new one.
Here’s one: Until now, operating-room nurses had trouble talking to one
another about their stresses and “doctor problems” for fear of spawning
gossip or incurring the wrath of HR. Now “ORNurse,”
“Nurseconfidential.net” allows these specialized nurses to:
interact and chat anonymously with their peers nationwide and beyond
pose questions to fellow nurses in similar situations and collect a variety
of advice
obtain advice anonymously from legal, HR, and clinical professionals
send private messages to people they’d like to talk with personally
post anonymous comments about specific doctors, problems, or patient
situations
get a daily e-mail summary of what’s going on at the site
While this isn’t exactly a “feature list,” it provides a good sense of the
product vision, its features and benefits, and why the site will attract a hard-
to-reach audience.
Checklist 4: Product Vision
Goal
: Team agreement on the long-term vision and 18-month schedule
Reference
: Chapter 3, Value Proposition Hypotheses/Product Vision
Vision
     
  What’s your long-term vision for your company?
     
  What do you ultimately want to change or solve?
     
  Are you going to do it with a series of products?
     
  How do you expand into adjacent markets?
     
  Do you need to get people to change their behavior?
     
  What will the world look like 3 years after you arrive on the scene?
Five years?
  
Put together a short narrative in bullets about your strategy
Delivery Dates
     
  MVP Delivery Date and features
     
  18-month product vision and delivery dates
Long Term Product Strategy
     
  Will your product create network effects?
     
  Can you price it with a predicable model?
     
  Can you create customer lock-in/high switching costs?
     
  Can you have high gross margins?
     
  Does it have organic demand versus requiring marketing spend?
     
  List product enhancements anticipated up to 18 months
     
  List key follow-on product enhancements
Exit criteria
:
     
  Vision
     
  Narrative
     
  Long-term product strategy
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Checklist 5: Product Features And Benefits
Goal
: Explain what the product is and why people will buy and use it
Reference
: Chapter 3, Product Features/Benefits Hypothesis and 
Low-
Fidelity MVP Hypothesis
What problem or need are you solving?
     
  What do you think the biggest 
pain
 is in how customers work/play?
     
  If they could wave a magic wand and change anything what would it
be?
     
  How does the product solve those problems or needs?
     
  What do people do today to solve their problem?
Product Benefits List
     
  List the benefits through the customer’s eyes
     
  Something new? Better? More? Faster? Cheaper? Etc.
     
  Underneath the features above, summary benefits for each
     
  Will these Benefits be accepted as such or do they need explanation?
Describe the Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
     
  What do you want to learn?
     
  From who?
     
  What is the smallest feature set?
Create a One-Page User Story
     
  Include product vision, features, benefits
Exit criteria
:
     
  Describe the product’s features and benefits
     
  Describe the MVP
     
  
Create a User Story describing what job the product will do
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Note to reader: These following guidelines, geared for physical channel
startups, are invaluable to web/mobile startups as well.
Value Proposition Hypothesis 
(Part 1/Physical)
Start this step by filling out your canvas with the value proposition
hypothesis: the product or service being offered to customers. You’ll include
details about the product, its features and benefits, as well as the company’s
long-term product vision and its initial minimum viable product. Think of the
value proposition as a contract between the customer and your company
where the customer “hires” your startup to solve a problem.
Write a series of briefs that capture the founders’ hours of thinking,
talking, and brainstorming about the product in three separate, specific areas:
Product Vision
Product Features & Benefits
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
The product development team produces much of the product brief, one
of the few times it’s asked to engage in a paper exercise. They put key value
proposition hypotheses down on paper and turn them into briefs agreed to by
all executives..
Product Vision
This portion of the value proposition brief captures your vision for what you
want your successful company to become.
Over time, successful companies are usually more than a single product.
What’s your long-term vision for your company? What do you want to
ultimately change? Are you going to do it with a series of products? How do
you expand into adjacent markets? How do you get people to change
behavior? What’s the world look like three years after you arrive on the
scene? Five years after?
Shape a long-term vision with a short narrative told in bullet points. For
example in the 1990s, a financial software company might have described its
user story this way:
Consumers hate to reconcile their checkbooks
We think we can develop a computer program that emulates a
checkbook.
It will automate all the hard and tedious parts of home banking
Consumers can use it to pay bills by connecting to the Internet
Millions of people will start using home computers to do something they
never did before
Today small businesses use bookkeepers to keep their books
After we succeed in automating consumers we will expand into financial
software for small businesses
Millions of small businesses will start using computers to do something
they never did before
Suddenly, the company vision is clear with a few simple bullet points.
The vision is critical because the Customer Development team has to paint a
picture for earlyvangelists of what the product will look like a year or two
into the future.
Only because earlyvangelists are buying into your
total vision will they spend money for an
incomplete, buggy, barely functional first product.
 
In the long-term vision, the product team specifies the delivery date for
the MVP and for follow-on products or enhancements to the product as far
out as the team can see (18 months to three years). In startups, this request
usually elicits a response like, “How can I come up with future dates when
we barely know the first MVP delivery date?” Reassure your anxious product
development team that this first pass at a schedule isn’t set in stone.
Only because earlyvangelists are buying into your total vision will they
spend money for an incomplete, buggy, barely functional first product.
 The
vision should convince everyone involved that this is an opportunity worth
the investment of millions of dollars and years of work. Ironically, few
startups end up with products that look like their initial vision.
Finally, it’s never too early to think about strategic issues:
Will it create network effects? A single fax machine was useless but
became more valuable as more people acquired them
Can you price it with a predictable pricing model—i.e., subscriptions
versus one-time sales?
Can you create customer lock-in/high switching costs? Think of trying
to get your data from Facebook or from your doctor’s office
Can you have high gross margins?
Does it have organic demand versus marketing spend? Companies with
organic demand have business models that don’t require expensive
marketing. Think Google, eBay, Baidu, Skype, etc.
Product Features and Benefits
This portion of the value proposition brief captures what the product is and
why people will use or buy it.
While many engineers think new products are all about product features,
the product is just one of many elements of a successful startup. The 
product
features list
 is a one-page document consisting of one- or two-sentence
summaries of the top 10 (or fewer) features of the complete product vision.
(If there’s some ambiguity in describing a particular feature, include a
reference to a more detailed engineering document.)
Essentially, the feature list is Product Development’s contract with the
rest of the company. The biggest challenge will be deciding what features
will ship in what order. Developing the MVP will start the prioritization
process. Once you get out of the building, customers will guide the process as
they begin interacting with the earliest version of the MVP.
Think of features as the things engineering is building, and think of
benefits as the problem you’re solving for the customer.
Think of benefits as the problem you’re solving for
the customer.
 
Once you have the feature list, you shape a product 
benefits
 list by
describing the specific product benefits 
as seen through customers’ eyes.
(Something new? Something better? Faster? Cheaper?) Then develop a “user
story.” This short narrative explains 
what job the product will do.
 How will it
solve a problem that customers are eager to fix, or fulfill a need they have?
Ideally, the product solves a mission-critical problem, delivers a compelling,
exciting consumer benefit, or addresses an unspoken need. (Saves money or
time? Relieves a symptom? Fun, relaxing, faster? Better? Cheaper?) A bank-
software company might describe its user story this way:
Customers always face long lines at our bank on Fridays and on the first
and last days of the month when they come in to cash or deposit checks;
they get frustrated and often angry
We think we lose 5 percent to 8 percent of our customers as a result of
frustration
We can measure lost profits of about $500,000 a year, significant
because it’s 7 percent of the total
This $150,000 software package halves the time it takes to make a
deposit and will be even faster in later versions
When thinking about product features, remember that a value
proposition can take the form of a higher-performance product or a less
expensive or more convenient product. It can address a market niche or
segment or solve problems in a new or different, faster or cheaper way.
Sometimes the product’s physical or visual design or even the brand itself
may be different enough to command 
attention. Products don’t always solve
problems, either. While most business products do, consumer goods more
often serve 
needs
 in areas as diverse as online gaming, social networks,
fashion, and cars.
It’s normal for marketers to want to describe the product benefits, but
it’s likely that marketing doesn’t have facts about customers yet, just
opinions. In a startup, the founders and Product Development are likely to be
the ones with the facts. So at this point, the marketing people would be wise
to bite their tongues and listen to the product development group’s
assumptions about the features and exactly how they’ll benefit customers.
These engineering-driven benefits represent hypotheses you’ll test against
real customer facts. In 
Phase 2
, you’ll get out of the building to collect this
feedback directly from customers.
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
The 
MVP
 is the final portion of this first value proposition brief. It’s a
concise summary of the smallest possible group of features that will work as
a stand-alone product while still solving at least the “core” problem and
demonstrating the product’s value.
The MVP is:
a tactic for cutting back on wasted engineering hours
a strategy to get the product into earlyvangelists hands as soon as
possible
a tool for generating maximum customer learning in the shortest
possible time
Start the MVP brief by defining what needs to be learned—and from
whom. Customer Development efforts will engage a very small group of
early visionary and passionate customers to guide product-feature
development until a profitable business model emerges. The sooner the MVP
is in their hands, the sooner feedback can arrive. Rather than asking
customers explicitly about feature X, Y or Z, one approach to defining the
MVP is to ask, “What is the smallest or least complicated problem that the
customer will pay us to solve?”
This approach runs counter to the typical cry for more features, which is
often based on what the competitors have or what the last customer visited
had to say. The MVP is the inverse of what most sales and marketing groups
ask of their development teams.
A goal of Customer Development is to 
understand
what not to ship.
 
Startups tend to collect a list of features that, if added to the product,
would get just that one additional customer to buy. Soon a 10-page feature
list evolves just to sell to 10 customers. That’s a plan for failure. The goal of
Customer Development is 
not
 to collect features from customers. 
It’s to
understand what not to ship
. The perfect feature list is just one paragraph
long and can be sold to thousands or millions of customers. A core tenet of
the Customer Development Manifesto is “less is more.” Minimize the
number of features 
not used
 by getting a MVP into customers’ hands as
quickly as possible. An easy guideline: “no new features until you’ve
exhausted the search for a business model.”
Customer Segments: Source/Wiring Hypothesis
 When you’re done with this brief, you’ll have developed a customer
archetype and be able to say things like, “We believe most of our customers
are age-18-to-25 tech-savvy young urban professionals who use Macs and
spend two hours a day on Facebook” or “Twenty-five percent of my
customers read 
Science
 and 
Nature
 magazine religiously and want a better
way to order chemical reagents and lab supplies.” And you’ll be able to
understand and draw a day in the life of a customer and draw a consumer web
influence map.
Start by reviewing the 
“customer segments/physical” hypotheses
.
The Customer Archetype: a Guide to Who Your
Customers Are
A customer archetype combines everything you know about your “most
typical” customers or users into one or more complete profiles. (Obviously
not every customer will look like this homogenized “average.” In fact, you
more than likely will have several archetypes.)
Compile the picture by gathering statistics about customers’
demographics and behavior. (For help, see 
Customer Understanding
 in Phase
3.) Use Google Trends, Google Insights, and Facebook ads to look at
web/mobile customer demographics. Use Crunchbase to look at who
competitors are selling to. Interview people you think look most like your
potential customers and understand who they are, what they do, and how they
behave. Search online for studies, news articles, and reports about your target
consumers. Study competitors’ media choices, press coverage 
and annual
reports. Most important, continue to update the archetype as you learn more
about customers over time.
A Guide to Using Customer/Archetypes to Drive Strategy
 (Figure 3.2)
Are your target customers or users big executives, networking nannies,
or teen gamers? Suburbanites or city dwellers? Single or married? Gather as
much detail as possible. How old are they? How much do they earn? How
much leisure time do they typically have and how much spending money?
Focus on their web/mobile-device ownership or access: desktop, laptop, iPad,
or smartphone—or all four? Are they loners or social-network heavyweights,
and do they share sites and information generously with others? When
they’re online, are they alone at home or in a crowd at school? Use the
detailed example in 
Figure 3.2
 as a guide when developing yours.
“A Day-in-the-Life”: a Guide to What Customers
Do
How much time do your customers spend online in a typical 24-hour day? Is
it at their desk, on a laptop, or on a handheld while driving? Your success
depends on becoming a regular part of the customer’s day, whether for
information, social networking, play, or e-commerce. But what’s the source
of the “newfound” time they’ll spend on your new site or using your new
app? Will they sleep less? Will they spend less time on Facebook or eBay?
Will they spend less time goofing off at work to spend time at the new site?

What’s the source of the “newfound” time they’ll
spend on your new site or using your new app?
 
Be sure to understand how they find out about new products. Are they
religious readers of TechCrunch or 
People
, game-review sites or news feeds?
Do they Tweet often, and do they read Tweets from two people or 50? Text
twice or 100 times a day, and to whom? Where do they go for information
about products in general and products like yours, and how often and for how
long?
Where will you find your customers? On the web, your customers can
be anywhere: at niche websites, reading blogs, on Facebook and other social
networks, or on social news sites. The could be Tweeting or reading Tweets,
texting or engaging with other similar customers on forums, wikis, and more.
A Guide to Using A Day-in-the-Life to Drive Strategy
 (Figure 3.3)
Create a “day in the life” scenario using 15- or 30-minute increments
from wakeup to bedtime, paying close attention to time spent on web/mobile
devices, specifying not only which device but what your customer is actually
doing on the device and for how long: texting with friends, reading blogs
(note which ones), playing mobile or social games (note which ones),
shopping for shoes (note where), or posting pictures of her cat on Facebook?
Use the detailed example in 
Figure 3.3
 as a guide when developing
yours.
Summarize the archetype and day-in-a-life in a tight bullet-point format.
Use those bullets to evaluate the potential value of activities you’ll use to
“get” customers when developing the upcoming Customer Relationships
hypothesis. Figures 
3.2
 and 
3.3
 offer an example for a company selling
downloadable gourmet-cooking lessons targeting working couples who cook
together, and try to do it creatively.
When the customer archetype and “day in the life” are complete, you
now know what your customers look like, what they do with their days, and
how to find them.
This example illustrates how the archetype and “day in the life” efforts
can focus “customer acquisition” activity. While there’s no such thing as
perfect targeting in mass-marketing efforts, fine-tuning every “get customers”
activity to “fish where the fish are” helps maximize the return on every
customer-relationships dollar you’ll spend.
Here’s How to Create a Consumer Web Influence Map:
In the web/mobile world, 
influence maps
 are as daunting and complex as they
are influential. Think of the number of ways a consumer can be influenced
online, and how your efforts can also influence the influentials themselves as
part of the marketing process. “Dots” on the online influence map include
blogs and chat rooms, authoritative websites, social networks, pundits, and
referral or reference sites. In addition to delivering direct exposure, these
influencers are often significant sources of “natural search” clicks that bring
people to the website.
Consumer Web Influence Map
 (Figure 3.4)
Finally, recognize that in web/mobile apps, you may have multiple
customer segments in a multi-sided market. In this case, “customers” can be
users who may pay nothing for the product or service but provide a value to
the supplier that it can resell to others. Google is the canonical “multi-sided”
example: billions of “customers” search at Google for free, and millions of
advertisers pay to reach them. Most social-network and content sites operate
this way.
Checklist 6: Customer Segments
Goal
: Develop a hypothesis of who your customers are and what problems
they have that will drive them to use your product
Reference
: Chapter 3, Customer Segments and 
Source Hypotheses
Define the Customer Problem
     
  Does the customer have a latent, passive, active or vision
problem/need?
Define the Customer type
     
  Define the distinctly different types of “customer”
     
  Who will be the actual day-to-day users of the product?
     
  Who are the influencers and recommenders?
     
  Who is the “Economic Buyer”? (i.e. whose budget will pay for it?)
     
  Do you think the Economic Buyer has an existing budget for this
product or do they need to get one approved?
     
  Who are the “Decision Makers?”
     
  Who else needs to approve the purchase? And who can kill it?
What are the Customer’s wants and needs?
     
  Rated on a “problem recognition scale”
     
  Does product solve a mission-critical company problem or satisfy a
must-have customer need?
     
  How painful is this problem?
  
Draw the Customer Archetypes
  
Draw the Day in the life of a customer – before and after your product
Draw the Organizational and customer influence maps
     
  List those who could influence a customer’s buying decision
     
  Consider the product’s influence on his daily life
Exit criteria
:
     
  Customer types and problem or need
     
  Customer archetypes
     
  Depict a day in the life of a customer
     
  Organizational and customer influence maps
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Note to reader: These following guidelines, geared for physical channel
startups, are invaluable to web/mobile startups as well.
Customer Segments: Who/Problem Hypothesis
(Physical)
This brief describes who the customers are (the customer types) and what
problems, needs or passions they have. It includes five components:
customer problems, needs or passions
customer types
customer archetypes
a day in the life of customer
organizational map and customer influence map
The Customer Problem, Need or Passion
Products are sold because they solve a problem or fill a need. (See the 
bank
teller story
 in Value Proposition.) Understanding problems and needs
involves understanding their sources. Get out of the building to discover how
customers experience the problem and why (and how much) it matters to
them. Understand the organizational impact problem, and the intensity of
pain it causes the company/family/consumer. Use a simple “problem
recognition scale” for each important type of customer (
Figure 3.5
).
Customers will express:
a 
latent problem:
 they have a problem but don’t know it
a 
passive problem:
 they know of the problem but aren’t motivated or
aware of the opportunity to change
an 
active (or urgent) problem:
 they recognize a problem or passion and
are searching for a solution but haven’t done any serious work to solve
the problem
a 
vision:
 they have an idea for solving the problem and even have
cobbled together a home-grown solution, but are prepared to pay for a
better one
Study the problem. Is your product solving a mission-critical company
problem or satisfying a must-have consumer need? Is your product a must-
have or a nice-to-have? When your product solves a problem that costs
customers sleep, revenue, or profits, things are definitely looking up. When
it’s the hottest “new new thing” in town, whether that town is physical or
virtual, capitalize on the opportunity. The best startups discover a situation
where customers have tried to build a solution themselves—they
simultaneously discover both a mission-critical problem and a customer-
visualized solution. Wow. Now simply convince the customer that if they
build it themselves, they’re detouring into a different, usually non-core
business—
your
 new business!
The best startups discover a situation where
customers have tried to build a solution themselves.
 
Then again, not every product solves problems. Some provide fun or
information, others glamour or romance. Social networks don’t solve
problems but sure have millions of visitors—they fill consumer 
needs and
desires
. Even if it’s fun or pure luxury, recognize that consumers require
justification for a purchase.
After identifying the customer types, craft a hypothesis about their
emotional wants and desires. Describe how to convince these customers that
the product can deliver an emotional payoff: glamour, beauty, wealth,
prestige, a hot date or lost pounds.
Customer Types
Whether a customer is spending time on a social network, buying a stick of
gum, or purchasing a million-dollar telecom system, every sale involves a set
of decision-makers. Thus customer analysis starts with an understanding of
what types of customers to approach. Chances are several people in a number
of categories have problems that your product can solve or needs or
ambitions 
that it can satisfy. Customer discovery identifies and probes these
different needs. Customer types include:
End Users
: The day-to-day users of a product push the buttons, touch the
product, use it, love it, and hate it. A deep understanding of their needs and
motivations is vital, recognizing that the end user may often have the least
influence in the sales or adoption process. This is typically true in complex
corporate sales.
Customer Types
 (Figure 3.5)
Influencers
: At times, the most powerful pressure on a customer’s buying
decisions may not be something the startup did directly but something done
or said by someone who’s uninvolved. In every market or industry, online
and off, a select group of individuals pioneers the trends, styles and opinions.
Ask a famous dress designer when a movie star wears her dress to the Oscars.
Or consider the effect of thousands of people clicking their Facebook “like”
button or Tweeting about a product, ad or service. Sometimes the influencers
are paid bloggers or pundits in market-research firms. They may be kids or
celebrities who wear the latest fashions. 
Include the target list of outside
influencers and address how they’ll be reached. Free product, payments,
celebrity events, free computers and online memberships are among the many
options.
Recommenders
: They influence purchase decisions but differ from
influencers because their opinions can make or break a sale. A recommender
could be a widely read blogger raving about a new online game, a department
head saying any new PCs should come from Dell, a hospital committee
approving a new medical device, or a spouse with a particularly strong brand
preference. It can also be an external force like Gartner Group, Forrester
Research, Martha Stewart or Consumer Reports.
Economic buyers
: They sit further up the decision chain and often control or
approve the purchase or budget. (Important people to know!) They can be
corporate VPs, office managers, insurance companies with issuing
reimbursement codes, teens with allowances, or spouses with vacation
budgets.
Decision-makers
: They may be the economic buyers or reside even higher
up in the decision-making hierarchy. Decision-makers wield the ultimate
purchase authority and are sometimes called UDMs (ultimate decision-
makers) or VITOs (very important top officers) or perhaps “Mom,” “Dad” or
“honey.” Be sure to understand their motivations.
Saboteurs
: They can lurk anywhere (as saboteurs do) and hold titles
including CFO, CIO, child, spouse, or purchasing agent with “friends.” They
can be found in strategic planning departments or in your own home, where
their veto can slow things dramatically. Find them. Identify patterns that
reveal where they’re hiding in the decision process.
Later, during customer validation, knowing all the players in detail will
be essential. For now, simply recognize that the customer is more
complicated than a single individual.
Customer Archetypes
Remember the axiom “A picture is worth a thousand words”? There’s no
better way for the startup team to visualize its customer targets than to take
the time to depict each of the key customer types—the end user and the
decision-maker at a minimum (at least make a few sketches or doodles).
Customer archetypes help the team visualize who will buy or use the product
and helps crystallize product strategy, customer acquisition, and more.
Customer Archetype
 (Figure 3.6)
In a business-to-business sale, does the end user work in an office, a
cubicle or a boiler room? Is he or she a business traveler, a presenter, or a
heads-down number cruncher? Is the decision-maker in a corner office, is she
a scientist in a research lab with a wall lined with prestigious degrees and
awards, or is she on the factory floor?
To understand more about customer archetypes and how they’re used,
review a detailed discussion in the next section, “Customers/Source—
Web/Mobile.” Once you’ve read that, create a comprehensive view of each
key customer archetype, using the data you collected.
Consumer archetypes are generally easier to create than business-to-
business, where relationships are far more complex. Identify as many
hypotheses about the buyer’s demographic and psychographic profile as
possible. Is the buyer affluent, fashion-conscious, healthy and active?
Married with pets and toddlers or teens? In a house, an apartment, or a trailer
park? These characteristics will influence many aspects of the business
model, including customer relationships, channel, and revenue model.
A Day in the Life of a Customer
One of the most powerful ways to understand your customers, whether
they’re consumer or business customers, is to discover how they “work” and
write it down, delineating a day in their life.
...discover how customers “work” and write it
down, delineating a day in their life.
 
In the case of businesses, this step requires a deep understanding of a
target company on many levels. Let’s use selling software to a bank as an
example. How a bank works isn’t something you’ll discover by cashing a
check. You want to know how the world looks from a banker’s perspective.
To begin with, how do the potential end users of the product (the tellers)
spend their days? What products do they use? How much time do they spend
using them? How would life change for these users after they have your
product? Unless you’ve been a bank teller, these questions should leave you
feeling somewhat at a loss, but how are you going to sell a product to a bank
to solve tellers’ problems if you don’t understand how they work?
(If you’re not an experienced salesperson, this whole notion of getting
out of the building can sound intimidating. The 
“Get Out of the Building”
section of customer discovery
, Chapter 4, describes how to set up your first
meetings.)
Now run this exercise from the perspective of branch managers. How do
they spend their day? How would your new product affect them? Run it
again, this time 
thinking about bank presidents. What on earth do they do?
What do they read? Who influences their decisions? How will your product
affect her? And if you’re installing a product that connects to other software
the bank has, you’re going to have deal with the IT organization. How do the
IT people spend their day? What other software do they run? How are their
existing systems configured? Who are their preferred vendors? Are they
standing at the door with confetti and Champagne waiting to welcome yet
another new company with yet another product?
The answers are easy. Asking the right questions is
hard.
 
Business products are generally purchased because they solve problems,
so a deep understanding of the buyer is required. If you’re selling a retailer
point-of-sale tools, for example, can someone on your team work behind a
busy counter for a few days? There’s no better way to understand than to dive
in. Learn how prospective users currently solve their problems, online or off,
and how they’d do it differently using the new product. What will motivate
these customers to buy? Draw a vivid and specific picture of a day in the life
of the customer, and do the research in the same place where they do their
work or have their fun, not in the company conference room or alone at a
local Starbucks.
Finally, back to our banking example, do you know about trends in the
banking industry? Is there a banking-industry software consortium? Are there
bank software trade shows? Industry analysts? Unless you’ve come from
your target industry, this part of your customer-problem brief may include
little more than lots of question marks. That’s OK. In customer development,
the answers turn out to be easy; it’s asking the right questions that’s difficult.
You’ll be going out and talking to customers with the goal of filling in all the
blank spots on the customer-problem brief.
For a consumer product, the same exercise is applicable. How do
consumers solve their problems today? How would they solve their problems
with your product? Would they be happier? Smarter? Feel better? Do you
understand what will motivate these customers to buy?
Your final exam doesn’t happen until you come back to the company
and, in meetings with the product development team and your peers, draw a
vivid and specific picture of a day in the life of your customer.
A Sample Organizational/Influence Map
 (Figure 3.7)
Organizational/Influence Maps
Now having a deeper understanding of a customer’s typical day, you realize
that except in rare cases, most customers don’t work by themselves.
Consumers interact with friends and family, while businesspeople interact
with their colleagues. List the people who could influence a customer’s
buying decisions and draw a tentative diagram of the prospective customer
and all the influences surrounding him or her. Also depict the product’s
impact on their day-to-day work or personal life. Then build a map showing
potentially influential people who surround the user. At a large company, the
diagram will be complex, with lots of initial unknowns.
Channels Hypothesis
 The distribution-channel brief describes how a web/mobile product gets
from company to customers.
Begin this hypothesis development by reading the introduction to the
physical channel section, just prior to this one. It addresses general channel
strategy and costs of various channels and how they affect revenue.
Web/mobile channels can reach billions of wired people worldwide via
computer, tablet, or handheld device. These channels are “always on,” and
never sleep, often literally in the palm of a consumer’s hand and usually
within arm’s reach 24 hours a day. The reach, persistence and accessibility of
the mobile channel has only just begun to affect the way people live, work,
buy, and do.
A storefront or service solution accessible to literally billions of people
every single minute of every day is a marketer’s dream. Web/mobile products
can be built quickly and enable a near-instant presence at potentially minimal
cost—as little as $5 a month for a small online Yahoo store, for example. The
company retains complete control, keeps nearly 100 percent of the revenue
from its direct sales, and can change pricing, promotion and more in mere
moments.
But the downside of this is that no customers “walk by” the website, and
the burden and cost of generating awareness, traffic, and sales falls entirely
on the company. (This is discussed in greater detail later in the 
customer
relationship hypothesis
.) Whether it’s a website run by the company itself or
Amazon.com
 or Apple’s App Store, success in the web/mobile channel is
almost entirely dependent on creating demand, attracting visitors to the site
cost-effectively, and persuading them to engage with the product or buy it.
Web/Mobile Distribution Channel Choices
 (Figure 3.8)
Web/Mobile Channel Choices
Much like the physical distribution channel, each web/mobile channel has its
strengths, weaknesses, and costs. (Increasingly, physical products are sold
both online and in a physical channel.) As a startup you should pick 
the one
distribution channel
 that provides the optimum balance between the
company’s value proposition, its costs and revenue model, and how
customers prefer to buy. (You can add additional channels as you scale and
grow.)
Pick one distribution channel. You can add
additional channels as you scale and grow.
 
Dedicated e-commerce
: Your company offers its products for sale directly
on your own “dedicated” e-commerce website (which can be hosted
anywhere). Customers access the site via a web browser. Whether the product
is physical or web/mobile, consumers and businesses can learn details, see
products, compare features, and complete the transaction at the single URL.
     
Strengths:
 Basic sites are easy to create, and deliver complete control of
price, product presentation, inventory and more.
     
Weaknesses:
 Company must bear all challenges and costs of traffic-
building and converting visitors to buyers.
Two-step e-distribution
: This is how your company can reach many more
customers by simultaneously selling your products on e-commerce sites that
help generate awareness and demand. It is the most common web/mobile
channel, encompassing every conceivable retailer from 
Amazon.com
BestBuy.com
, the Android and Apple app stores to small e-commerce sites.
Distribution costs vary, with 
Amazon.com
 at the high end, charging 55
percent of retail prices to sell a physical book. For that hefty sum, this
channel maintains inventory, packs and ships the goods, and collects
payment. As a rule, the more the retailer does to generate consumer demand,
the more it earns for making the sale.
     
Strengths:
 Fastest way to get national distribution at a variable cost with
little upfront spending.
     
Weaknesses:
 Little control of on-site promotion or product visibility,
except with extra spending.
Aggregators
: The online equivalent of a physical shopping mall, usually in a
single category. They aggregate consumers with common areas of interest
and direct them through a web/mobile supermarket of products. Customers
access the site via a web browser. Hundreds of mortgages and related
financial products are available through 
LendingTree.com
, while
cloudshowplace.com
 provides a buyer’s guide to hundreds of SAAS software
tools, many of which can be purchased with a few clicks on the showplace.
Diapers.com
 and Zappos (both owned by Amazon) aggregate baby and shoe
products, respectively, from hundreds of manufacturers. Online trade shows
for business-to-business products work in a similar way, creating the look
and feel of a typical trade show and selling booths to marketers who provide
demonstrations, white papers, and literature and can take orders in their
virtual “booths.”
     
Strengths:
 Fast way to get national distribution at a variable cost with little
upfront spending.
     
Weaknesses:
 Hard to get visibility, on-site promotion and marketing; can
be very costly.
Platforms that Operate as Channels
Mobile-app commerce
: A web/mobile application distribution platform
behaves in many ways just like a physical channel’s retail stores. Mobile apps
and many web apps and games are sold on web/mobile platforms. For
example, Zynga’s Farmville and other online games use Facebook, with
hundreds of millions of users, as a “platform.” Facebook offers its platform to
thousands of other companies, turning its social network into a sales channel.
Apple and Google’s Android offer app stores that allow mobile users to buy
everything from games to expense-account software for their iPhone or
Android phones.
Dedicated marketplaces like the iPhone app store or the Android are the
primary “platform-as-channel” marketplace for smartphone app. The Apple
App Store charges 30 percent of retail pricing for downloadable iPhone
applications. Smartphone apps dominated sales in this channel, but
salesforce.com
 opened its AppExchange for business-to-business applications
and other companies will follow.
     
Strengths:
 Massive reach in a fast-growing channel for games, software,
shopping applications and more. It’s a channel that’s “always on” and
quite handy (for literally many millions of consumers). This is an
explosive business opportunity.
     
Weaknesses:
 Costly intermediaries, file-size constraints, product-
presentation and payment challenges, operational complexity, extremely
difficult to get consumers’ attention or promote app or its marketing
messages.
Social commerce
: Social networks like Facebook and Twitter have moved
quickly to turn their platforms into commerce to monetize their vast
audiences. Customers access the site via a browser or dedicated app.
Web/mobile currency and items for enhanced online gaming are already
maturing, with many more vertical markets following in its lucrative
footsteps.
     
Strengths:
 Fast, potentially massive distribution; great for product
launches, awareness-building, and fast cash.
     
Weaknesses:
 Hard to create awareness and draw attention. Platforms take
50 percent or more as a cost of sales.
Flash sales
: Flash sales offer a list of consumers deep discounts on branded
merchandise with offers expiring in 24 or 48 hours. 
Gilt.com
, Groupon and
scores of clones assemble massive e-mail and social networking lists of
consumers eager to obtain product discounts in specific categories or
geographies. These social-commerce sites deliver the revenue and a volume
of customers.
Flash sales can generate massive red ink in a hurry.
 
     
Strengths:
 Fast, potentially massive distribution; great for product
launches, awareness-building, and fast cash.
     
Weaknesses:
 Often painfully expensive. End users often expect 50 percent
discounts from retail price; manufacturer then pays 50 percent of its 50
percent sales price to the social-commerce site. Can generate massive red
ink in a hurry.
Free-to-paid channel
: While it’s hard to say whether this is a platform, a
channel, or a demand-creation strategy, it’s an increasingly powerful way to
create customer relationships, particularly among companies with
web/mobile products that require little or no customization. A few fast-
growing companies such as Zynga have used social networking to create vast
audiences of free users of games like Farmville and MafiaWars. They provide
a certain amount of game play for free—sometimes even all of it—but sell
lots of web/mobile goods for real cash as they “hook” their users on the
game.
If they don’t convert and pay, you’re dead.
 
Other game companies offer free, limited versions widely or full
versions for a limited time (“seven-day free trial with your credit card”) only
to aggressively upsell free users to a more elaborate paid version. Recently,
online tax-software companies have begun offering free federal-tax-return
preparation online for simple tax returns, only to create a channel from which
they can upsell people with more complex returns to prepare or charge them
for state and municipal returns.
     
Strengths:
 Accelerates trial and adoption at relatively low cost. Terrific as
a launch strategy.
     
Weaknesses:
 Free-to-pay is sexy but dangerous. You can get tons of users
fast, but if they don’t convert and pay, you’re dead. Mapping profitable
conversion of free to paid users makes or breaks the company.
Tests Can Help You Pick the Channel
For some products, the channel choice is obvious. There’s one channel for an
iPhone or iPad app, and another equally obvious channel for social games.
Many products, however, will need to test both the cost-effectiveness and
volume potential of several channels to determine where to put their 
energy,
focus, and marketing dollars. A simple downloadable app, for example,
might simultaneously test as many as three channels: an app store, the
freemium model, and online retail. Design the test to spend roughly the same
amount of money on each one, and—at a bare minimum—look to generate at
least $2 in revenue if not more for every dollar spent on marketing (you can
always improve it later). Then see which program delivers customers at the
lowest cost per customer, and which delivers the greatest absolute number of
customers.
Multi-Sided Markets Need Unique Channel Plans
At about the same time a physical channel company begins thinking about its
sales channels, startups in multi-sided web/mobile markets should develop a
hypothesis about their “other” side or, in this case, the “revenue channel.”
Most multi-sided revenue channels function quite simply: they attract a
large number of users and advertisers pay to reach them via textlinks, banner
ads, in-game visibility or traditional online advertising. So the goal now is
relatively straightforward, identify potential advertisers or agencies, and
estimate how much they’re willing to pay, how the sales process works, and
whether the hypotheses about the revenue “side” of the market is valid.
Beware the two deadliest advertising-related problems for multi-sided
marketers: small and indistinct audiences.
The more distinct the audience—and the harder it
is to aggregate—the more valuable it will be.
 
     
Small audiences:
 Advertising agencies like to spend big piles of their
client’s money with as few insertion orders (the advertising equivalent of
a purchase order) as possible, and they want to reach massive numbers of
people with each one. Getting an insertion order or even the opportunity
to make a sales pitch to an advertising agency generally requires monthly
page views in the many millions. Make sure the “payer” channel’s
potential is clear as part of the channel validation process.
     
Indistinct audiences:
 The online advertising world is so littered with
unsold inventory that many advertisers buy huge volumes of banners,
skyscrapers and textlinks through online advertising “networks” that
aggregate dozens or hundreds of sites appealing to a specific group, such
as teenagers. They collect all the unsold inventory at a very low,
distressed price and roll it into one package that often includes hundreds
of millions of impressions for one or several advertisers.
     The more distinct the audience—and the harder it is to aggregate—the
more valuable it will be. “Working mothers” and “generation Y”
consumers can be aggregated easily, for example, while very frequent
fliers or luxury-car owners are harder to aggregate. Other high-value
audiences: orthodontists, owners or renters of private aircraft, gamers
who spend more than $100 a month on gaming, and high-roller casino
gamblers. The more distinctive a group, the more a multi-sided market
can charge the “other side” to reach the group with ads.
Checklist 7: Channels
Goal
: Develop a hypothesis of your distribution channel
Reference
: Chapter 3, Channel Hypotheses
  
What channel will your users use to buy from you?
Draw the Distribution Channel Diagram
     
  How much will the channel cost (direct expenses or channel discounts)
     
  Are there indirect channel costs (presales support, promotional
dollars...)
     
  What else is needed for customers to use/buy the product?
     
  How do they acquire those pieces?
     
  What is the net revenue after channel costs?
Is this a Multi-sided Market?
     
  How will you address each side of the market?
Exit criteria:
     
  Distribution channel selected
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Note to reader: These following guidelines, geared for physical channel
startups, are invaluable to web/mobile startups as well.
Channels Hypothesis 
(Physical)
The channel brief describes how the product gets from company to
customers.
The difference between physical and web/mobile channels is dramatic.
In one, physical goods move from a loading dock to a customer or a retail
outlet. In another, no human involvement is required, as the product is
offered and sold online. (If the product itself is bits, it’s both sold and
delivered online.)
Physical channels have been around for centuries. They’re an
“intermediate customer” the startup has to deal with, and the barriers can be
significant: high cost, long lead times, lack of control, and lack of promotion,
to name a few. However, the rewards can be great. In the 20
th
 century,
physical distribution was especially important. Back then, the pinnacle of
distribution was to be sold at Walmart, which welcomes 20 million
Americans every day.
Consider whether your product fits the channel.
 
Most companies use both web/mobile and physical channels today. For
example, even with some 10,000 massive physical stores, Walmart also
invests heavily in 
walmart.com
, an alternate channel, as most national
retailers do. Most channel strategies, particularly for physical goods, today
involve both physical and web/mobile channels. Whether a company uses a
physical or web channel, it must generate customer demand and drive it into
the sales channel. Physical and web channels employ very different demand-
creation activities.
Consider Whether Your Product “Fits” the
Channel
Different sales channels support different product price bands. For example, a
salesperson selling enterprise software needs to bring in more than $1.5
million in annual revenue. On the other hand, few Smartphone applications
sell for more than $10, minus the typical 30 percent app-store fee. Other e-
tailers such as Amazon and 
bestbuy.com
 regularly sell products for hundreds
if not thousands of dollars, sometimes keeping as much as half the gross
revenue for themselves.
Be sure to factor all channel costs into the pricing hypothesis, since
many channels charge for distribution, promotion, and even sometimes for
placing products on the shelves or returning unsold merchandise to the
company. Channel selection changes the company’s revenue model, often
dramatically, so be sure to revisit and update the revenue stream hypothesis
based on the company’s costs and net revenue when making the channel
selection. (Always compute the revenue stream on a “net” basis, reflecting
only revenue that will arrive in company coffers once the dust settles.)
Which Channel Should I Use?
A tragic mistake many startups make is to overreach on initial channel
efforts. Until the company completes customer validation, it should pick a
sales channel representing the greatest potential and focus on it to the
exclusion of all others. Your company is still testing and expanding its
hypotheses and needs to focus on learning. Don’t try to launch a product via
direct sales, chain stores and direct mail all at once—it’s almost impossible to
succeed at all three. The big exception, of course: physical-channel launches
with simultaneous web-marketing (and sometimes sales) support.
Decisions about channel and pricing are interrelated, so develop the
channel hypothesis while working simultaneously on the 
revenue and pricing
hypothesis
. For example, retail distribution cuts the company’s revenue
dramatically while direct sales may deliver more sales dollars but do so more
slowly. When considering which channels to adopt, keep these criteria in
mind:
Are there established buying habits/practices in the product category?
Does the channel strengthen the sales process? At what cost to the
company?
What are the price and complexity issues surrounding sale of the
product?
Startups seldom get the channel strategy right the first time. Most
technology startups, for example, assume that a direct sales force is the way
to go, a hypothesis that’s often proved wrong. It’s almost always smartest—
and safest—to first observe existing buying patterns and habits for similar
products and product categories, since customers are demonstrating their
preferred channel by spending their money there.
Value Proposition 2: Market-Type and Competitive
Hypothesis
The market-type brief describes which of the four market types the company
fits into. (Refer to 
Chapter 1, Rule 7
, in the Customer Development
Manifesto.) It also adds a competitive brief.
Regardless of the channel they choose, startups adopt (or pursue) one of
four market types. The consequences of choosing the wrong market type are
severe (prematurely burning cash on marketing and sales before it’s needed),
but unlike decisions about product features, the market-type choice is a “late-
binding” decision. While a final decision can be deferred until customer
creation, it’s wise to develop and test an initial market-type hypothesis while
moving through the customer discovery phase. In the next chapters, we’ll
come back to the market type selection process many times, and refine and
deepen the analysis after further discussing customers and market.
In this brief, seek a provisional answer to just one question: is the
company entering an existing market, re-segmenting an existing market,
creating a new market or cloning a market?
Market type drives marketing spending, sales
timing and cash need.
 
Market Type
For some startups, the market-type choice is pretty clear. When entering a
market that has a ton of competitors, whether it’s smartphones, social
networks, glucose 
meters or airplanes, the choice has already been made for
you: it’s an existing market. On the other hand, if your company invents a
new class of product no one has ever seen before, it’s most likely in a new
market. However, most companies have the luxury of choosing which market
type to use. So how to make the decision? A few simple questions begin the
process:
Is there an established, well-defined market with large numbers of
customers? Do customers know the name of the market and do
competitors exist? Does the product have an edge (better performance,
features, service) over competitors? If so, it’s an existing market
Would some part of an existing market buy a product designed to
address its specific needs? Even if it cost more? Or even if it had worse
performance in an aspect of the product irrelevant to this niche? If so,
think re-segmented market/niche strategy
Another type of re-segmentation answers the question: Are there
customers at the low end of an existing market who will buy “good
enough” performance if they can get it at a substantially lower price? If
yes, think re-segmented market/low-cost strategy
Without an established and well-defined market, there are obviously no
existing customers or competitors and a new market is being created
Startups in Russia, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan and China (where
they have large local markets and language and cultural barriers) have
an additional market type: the clone market. Can you adopt/borrow/copy
an already-successful business model and company from the U.S. and
adapt it to local language and buying preferences. (Not too long from
now, ideas from those countries will be cloned in the U.S.)
When you talk to customers, they’ll have lots of opinions about where
the product fits. Don’t worry about wavering among the market-type choices.
For now, just look at each market type and pick the one that best fits the
company’s vision today. 
Table 3.1
 summarizes of the trade-offs.
Market Type Trade-Offs
 (Table 3.1)
One of the best tools for sorting out existing market entry strategies is
derived from military operations research. It suggests a few simple rules that
companies can use to analyze an 
existing market:
If a single company has 74 percent of the market, the market has
become an effective monopoly. For a startup, that’s an unassailable
position for a head-on assault. (Think Google in search or Facebook in
social networks.)
If the combined market share for the market leader and the second-
ranking company is greater than 74 percent and the first company is
within 1.7 times the share of the second, it means a duopoly commands
the market. Its position is impervious to attack by a startup. (In the
telecom sector, Cisco’s and Juniper’s combined share of the core router
market fits this description.)
If a company has 41 percent market share and at least 1.7 times the
market share of the next-largest company, it’s the market leader.
For a startup, this too is a very difficult market to enter. Markets with a
clear market leader offer an opportunity for re-segementation.
If the biggest player in a market has at least a 26 percent market share,
the market is unstable, with a strong possibility of abrupt shifts in the
company rankings. Here there may be some existing market entry
opportunities.
If the biggest player has less than 26 percent market share, it has no real
influence on the market. Startups that want to enter an existing market
find these the easiest to penetrate.
If you decide to attack a market that has just one dominant player, you
need to be prepared to spend three times the combined sales and marketing
budget of that dominant player. (Ouch—so much for going head-on with
Google or Facebook.)
In a market that has multiple participants, the cost of entry is lower, but
you still need to spend 1.7 times the combined sales and marketing budget of
the company you plan to attack. (To enter an existing market, you must steal
market share from an incumbent, hence the war analogy.) 
Table 3.2
summarizes the existing market cost of entry.
Market Type—Cost of Entry
 (Table 3.2)
Competition in an Existing Market
Now that you understand the type of market you’re in, the competitive
landscape becomes clearer. If you believe your company and product fit into
an existing market, you need to understand how your product outperforms
your competitors’. In an existing market the customers can tell you what the
basis of competition is. It nearly always has to do with key product attributes,
but sometimes it’s other components of the business model—e.g., channel or
price. Strive for a product or feature or improvement that can get a customer
to say, “I’ll pay anything for that.”
Positioning the product against the slew of existing competitors is
accomplished by adroitly selecting the basis of competition 
where you can
win.
 Remember it’s not always features. It can be convenience, services,
brand, etc., where the new entry is clearly better. Summarize the thinking in a
brief. When entering an existing market, good questions to address in the
brief include:
Who are the incumbents and which ones drive the market?
What is the market share of each competitor?
How many marketing and sales dollars will the market leaders spend to
compete?
What will the cost of entry be against incumbent competitors?
What performance attributes have customers said are important? How
do competitors define performance?
What share of this market does the company want to capture in the first
three years?
How do the competitors define the market?
Are there existing standards? If so, whose agenda is driving the
standards?
Does the company seek to embrace these standards, extend them, or
replace them? (If the answer is to extend or replace them, this may
indicate a re-segmented market.) When you enter an existing market,
though, also fill out the competitive brief discussed later in this section
to shape the positioning further
One way to plan your attack in an existing market is to refer to your
business model canvas. What jobs are your customers asking your product to
fill? What problem is your value proposition solving?
Re-segmenting an Existing Market
In an existing market, your startup is the weakest player with the least
resources. Therefore, attacking the strongest players head-on is foolish. You
want to choose strategies that acknowledge your weaknesses and play to your
agility. If there’s a dominant player with more than 74 percent market share,
don’t attack that market head-on. Why? Because you need three times the
resources of the market leader. Instead, target your attack at the point where
your limited resources can make a difference. You’ll segment the existing
market to create a submarket where your product can be unique or
substantially different. Or if you can create a new market, you can define a
space the market leader doesn’t address at all.
If your enemy is superior in strength, evade him. If
angry irritate him. Pretend to be weak, that he may
grow arrogant.
 
If the dominant player has between 26 percent and 74 percent market
share, pick your battles carefully. Remember the cost of a head-on attack:
three times the budget of a single competitor or 1.7 times that of a competitor
in a crowded market.
Most startups don’t have access to those financial resources. Therefore,
re-segmenting the market or creating a new market is almost always the
default when faced with a dominant incumbent. All the marketing tricks for
nipping at the heels of an entrenched competitor can be used here. Most of
them were invented 2,500 years ago by Sun Tzu and described in his book
The Art of War.
 Paraphrasing about: “All warfare is based on deception. If
your enemy is superior evade him. If angry irritate him. If equally matched,
fight, and if not, re-evaluate”.
Your goal is to become No. 1 in something important to your customer.
It could be product attribute, territory, distribution chain/retailer, or customer
base. Keep segmenting the market (by age, income, region, etc.) and focusing
on the competitors’ weak points until you have a battle you can win.
Remember, any company can take customers away from any other company
—if it can define the battle. When re-segmenting an existing market,
positioning rests on either:
     (a)  finding a unique niche where some product feature or service
redefines the market, creating a clear competitive advantage
     (b)  being the “low-cost provider” or
     (c)  combining differentiation and lower operating cost into a Blue Ocean
Strategy that creates an uncontested market space and makes the
competition irrelevant while creating and capturing new demand.
Southwest Airlines was among the first to re-segment air travel this
way, followed by many copycat failures and much later by JetBlue.
Cirque du Soleil is an example of a Blue Ocean re-segmentation,
offering product differentiation as well as lower operating costs
In an existing market, your startup is the weakest
player with the least resources.
 
When re-segmenting for a unique niche, address these questions in this brief:
What existing markets are customers coming from?
What are the unique characteristics of those customers?
What compelling needs of those customers are unmet by existing
suppliers?
What compelling product features will get customers to abandon their
current suppliers?
Why couldn’t existing companies offer the same thing?
How long will it take you to grow a market of sufficient size? What
size?
How will the company educate the market and create demand?
Given that no customers yet exist in the new segment, what are realistic
sales forecasts?
How can this forecast be tested?
Can parts of the business model be changed to differentiate the
company?
For this type of startup, draw a “market map” (a diagram of how this
new market will look) as shown in 
Figure 3.9
, to illustrate why the company
is unique. Draw the market map with the startup in the center. A re-
segmented market assumes that customers flow from an existing market(s).
Draw the existing markets that customers should flow from (remember that a
market is a set of companies with common attributes). Draw the product
features and functions that, when assembled, best describe the new product
(think Hershey bar, now with peanut butter and zero calories—each attribute
draws different customer groups).
Example of a Market Map
 (Figure 3.9)
When re-segmenting based on low cost, questions to address include:
What existing markets are customers coming from?
What are the unique characteristics of those customers?
What price will it take (known as “switching cost”) to get those
customers to spend time online with or buy from the new company?
What features are customers willing to give up to get the lower price?
How can this hypothesis be tested quantitatively?
Finally, visualize why thousands of new customers will believe in and
move to this market. And beware the “low-price provider” re-segmentation,
since competitors can reprice in a matter of days if not hours, eviscerating the
positioning that everyone just bet the new business on.
 The market map is particularly important for new web-based businesses.
Consider how much time you expect consumers to spend on the site, whether
for personal accounting, online gaming or social networking. Then consider
where the time will come from: will they abandon Site A or B, sleep less, or
do all their e-mail on the new social network? It’s a market map based on
minutes, not dollars.
Where will the minutes come from, and how and why will they come to
the new company. For social networks, it’s the “Facebook question:” what
can people do on the new social network that they can’t or don’t already do
on Facebook, the market leader, and why will they do it elsewhere?
It’s the web/mobile equivalent of market share. Explain how and why
consumers will “trade in” time they currently spend elsewhere for time on the
new site. If a new online game won’t cut back on someone’s playtime with
Farmville or Mafia Wars, where will he or she find the time to play an
additional new game? Figure it out and map the “time source.”
What could be better than a market with no
competitors?
 
Entering a New Market
What if there are no competitors? What if, after talking to all your early
customers, you continue to hear, “There’s nothing else like what your
company is offering”? What if, after looking at all the quantitative data, you
can’t find other companies with comparable products? Congratulations—
you’re creating a new market. At first 
glance, a new market has great appeal.
A standing joke is that every new market has its own descriptive TLA (three-
letter acronym). What could be better than a market with no competitors?
And absence of competition typically means that pricing isn’t a competitive
issue but an issue of what the market will bear. Wow, no competitors and
high margins!
A company creating a new market is a radically different type of
company from one entering or reframing an existing market. While there are
no market-share battles with competitors, there are also no existing
customers. If there are no existing customers, even an infinite demand-
creation budget at the point of product launch won’t garner market share.
Creating a new market is about long-term customer education and adoption.
New-market entries are by far the most expensive demand-creation
challenges, particularly since the marketer can’t say “tastier than Yummies”
or “faster than Porsche” or “cheaper than Brand X,” since no such
comparables exist. At the risk of sounding pedantic, creating a new market
means a market doesn’t currently exist—there are no customers. When
entering a new market, good questions to address include:
What are the markets adjacent to the new one being created?
What markets will potential customers come from?
What’s the company’s vision and why will lots of people care?
What “never could have been done before” will make customers
use/buy?
How long will it take to educate potential customers to grow a market of
sufficient size? What size is that?
How will the company educate the market? How will it create demand?
Given that no customers yet exist, what are realistic sales forecasts for
the first three years?
How much financing will it take to soldier on while educating and
growing the market?
What will stop a well-heeled competitor from taking over the market
once the startup develops it? (This phenomenon is the source of the
phrase “Pioneers are the ones with arrows in their backs.”)
Is the product better-defined as one that will re-segment a market or
enter an existing one?
New-market entries are by far the most expensive...
 
Companies compete in new markets not by besting other companies
with product features but by convincing a set of customers that the new
company’s market vision is real and solves a real problem a different way. A
few classic examples: Snapple, Toyota Prius, Siebel, Groupon, and
Facebook. However, who the users are, and the definition of the market itself
are both clearly unknown. This brief defines the new market and its users
with the startup at the center.
One last thing to consider: startups creating new markets won’t create a
market of sufficient size to generate a profit until three to seven years from
product launch. This sobering piece of data is derived from looking at the
results of hundreds of high-tech startups of the last twenty years. While you
may be convinced your startup is the exception, the odds say that unless
you’re in a “bubble economy,” it takes time for new ideas and products to
diffuse and catch on. (A bubble economy is defined as a time of irrational
exuberance in a market when all normal rules are repealed.)
Market type, in summary
: Market type is one of the most important choices
founders need to make and agree on with investors, since it drives spending,
timing and competitive analysis. The choice doesn’t need to be made during
customer discovery, but an initial hypothesis is needed. If investors are
expecting substantial revenue in Year One, thinking they’ve invested in an
existing-market company, the outcome is typically a new CEO. Market type
selection drives spending and budget as well as revenue expectations.
Competitive Brief
Once you understand your market type, it’s relatively simple to assemble a
competitive brief. This will help you understand how you’ll compete in the
market.
When entering an existing market or re-segmenting one, your first
instinct may be that the basis of competition is simply the product features of
your value proposition. That may be, but you may be missing a bigger
competitive advantage. Is there something about partners, the channel,
resources, etc. that would be a game changer? Think of Apple and the
original iPod. It combined a hardware player, which lots of vendors had, with
an easy-to-use software application, iTunes, which no one had (but others
could have built) and then added partners at the record labels (which required
Steve Jobs’ reality-distortion field). The business model canvas is a perfect
vehicle for brainstorming some of these ideas.
In a new market, it’s tempting to say, “We have no
competition.” But you’ll be wrong.
 
Explain how and why your new product is better than its competitors.
Other items the competitive brief should consider:
How have existing competitors defined the basis of competition? Is it in
terms of product attributes? Service? What are their claims? Features?
What makes the new company and its product stand out as dramatically
different? Features? Performance? Price?
Will customers care if the new product lets them do something they
couldn’t do before?
In a retail store, which competitive products will be shelved next to the
new entry?
For web/mobile apps, assess competitors’ product quality, features, sales
or user data, and traffic levels.
What’s strongest about each competitor’s product? What do current
customers like most about those existing products? What would
customers change about them?
What is a customer’s “reason to buy” or use the product, app, or site?
And which competitors will they abandon to do so, and why?
If you’re in a new market, it’s tempting to say, “We have no
competition.” But you’ll be wrong. The new product itself may not yet exist,
but what do people do today without it? Do they simply not do something, or
do it badly or inefficiently? What will your new product enable them to do
that they couldn’t do before. Why will they care?
It’s only natural that startups compare themselves with other startups
around them, but it’s important to remember a key tenet of Customer
Development: Don’t make a list of all competitors’ features to simply make a
bigger list. A few incremental features or improvements seldom result in a
great, scalable company. What’s more, in their first few years, startups
seldom put one another out of business.
Winners understand why customers buy.
 
While startups compete for funding and technical resources, 
winners
understand why customers buy. The losers never do.
 Competitive analysis
starts at why customers will buy and then looks at the whole market,
including new and established competitors.
Checklist 8: Market Type
Goal
: Select an initial Market Type
Reference
: Chapter 3, Market Type
  
Do you have a new product in an existing market?
  
Do you want to clone an existing market?
  
Do you need to redefine/reframe a market?
  
Or do you want to create an entirely new market?
     
  Is your product/service a substitute for something customers already
have?
     
  Is it a replacement?
     
  Is it a variant on something already out there, but can be “respun” into
something new?
     
  Is it something totally new?
Positioning in An Existing Market
     
  Define the basis of competition
     
  Who is driving the existing market?
     
  Do you have some advantage or appeal among any vertical or
horizontal market segment?
Positioning in An Existing Market you Want to Resegment
     
  Define the basis of the how you want to change the market
     
  Who is driving the existing market you want to resegment?
Positioning in a New Market
     
  How will you create the market
     
  Estimate of market creation costs
Exit criteria:
     
  A preliminary first hypothesis of the type of market
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Customer Relationships Hypothesis
 This customer relationships brief describes how you get customers to
your website or mobile app, keep them as customers and grow additional
revenue from them over time.
The “Get, Keep and Grow” Customers Funnel in Web/Mobile
(Figure 3.10)
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 This is not the time to broadly launch
your site or app to a wide audience. You are writing the briefs here, not
implementing tactics with your MVP!
 
Review the previous section on customer relationships for physical
products before starting this one. The web/mobile customer funnel in 
Figure
3.10
 is quite different from its physical counterpart in 
Figure 3.15
. Getting
customers here is simpler, having only two steps. It also includes a “viral
loop” where early customers invite friends and colleagues to explore the new
product. Finally, not visible in the diagram is the fact that web/mobile
startups can test tactics faster, market less expensively, and reach out to far
more customers than companies in the physical channel.
The test of “Get, Keep and Grow” activities during customer discovery
is small-scale, exposing the “rough and dirty,” or low-fidelity, minimum
viable product to a modest number of customers, perhaps a few hundred or
so, to gauge their reaction to the business model (including value proposition,
price, and product features.) Discovery explores which tactics work and
gauges initial reactions to the MVP.
Customer Relationship for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.3)
The right-hand column of 
Table 3.3
 provides an overview of
web/mobile “Get, Keep and Grow” strategies and tactics. It focuses first on
getting customers, since the company first has to 
have
 customers before it can
work to keep them, sell them a second time, or grow them.
Many web/mobile products operate as multi-sided markets; Google and
Facebook are canonical examples. Consumers use the product at no cost.
Advertisers pay the company to reach those customers with ads, AdWords,
textlinks and other marketing messages. That revenue is why Google can
afford to build massive data centers and offer search for “Free.”
Multi-sided marketers need two separate, parallel “Get” approaches—
one for the users and another for the payers, since the value proposition for
each is quite different. Almost universally, multi-sided marketers focus first
on efforts to get users. A company that has aggregated an audience of many
millions can almost certainly find marketers eager to pay for the privilege of
communicating with that audience.
Getting Customers: Acquisition and Activation
Develop the company’s hypothesis about how it will “Get” customers.
There are a million-plus apps for sale on mobile app stores and an
infinite number of commerce, social and content websites, so the mere fact
that you’ve launched a new one doesn’t make it a successful business.
Building your product is the easy part. The hard part is getting customers
 to
find your app, site or product. It’s a daunting, never-ending challenge to build
customer relationships, quite literally, one customer at a time.
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 3.11)
Building your product is easy. The hard part is
Getting Customers.
 
Acquisition vs. Activation: What’s the Difference?
Let’s get started with the first two steps for “getting” customers: acquisition
and activation.
“Get Customers” Tools for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4a)
Customer 
Acquisition
: The acquisition phase equates to the “awareness,”
“interest,” and “consideration” steps in the physical channel, where
customers learn about and explore a product before they buy. In web/mobile
apps, the “Get” effort focuses on bringing as many customers as possible to
the company’s online “front door”—the landing page. There, they’re
introduced to the product and hopefully buy it or use it. Since the number of
people who come to a landing page and look but don’t buy or use is often
very high, web/mobile “Get” plans must reach lots of people—for a
consumer website, that can be millions.
Customer 
Activation
: This second step in the “Get” process is much like the
“purchase” step in the physical channel. Here the customer shows interest
through a free download or trial, a request for more information, or a
purchase. 
A customer should be considered activated even if he doesn’t
purchase or register, as long as the company has enough information to re-
contact him
 (whether by e-mail, phone, text, etc.) with explicit permission to
do so.
Overview: How Customers Shop Online
Unlike the door-to-door salesmen of yesteryear, your job on the web is to
“pull” customers to you rather than to push your product at them. The web
offers a near-limitless tool set to help you pull customers in.
Your job on the web is to “pull” customers to you...
 
Your first step in customer acquisition and activation is understanding how
people buy or engage with your product. Here’s how it happens:
Step one
: People discover a need or want to solve a problem.
 They say, “I
want to throw a party,” or feel lonely and decide to find a hot party or a
dating site. Then what?
Step two
: They begin a search.
 Overwhelmingly, in this century, that search
begins online. It often happens at 
Google.com
, but it can happen on
Facebook, where they ask their friends, or on Quora, where they solicit
opinions, or on hundreds of other special-interest “recommendation” sites
from Yelp to Zagat to 
TripAdvisor.com
.
Step three
: They don’t look very hard.
 People don’t just “find” you online,
and in fact they often only pay attention to the first few things they uncover
(how often do you search beyond the first page of results on Google?). You
must 
make your site, app or product as visible as humanly possible, in as
many of these places as possible where your customers are likely to begin the
search. (The entire “Get” section ahead will guide you in doing just this.)
Step four
: They go where they’re invited, entertained or informed.
 You don’t
“earn” interest from your customers with hard-boiled sales pitches or bland
information. In a typical Google search, you’re one of many thousands of
options the customer can click on. So you have to earn that click by providing
inviting, helpful or entertaining information in lots of formats (copy,
diagrams, white papers, blogs, videos, games, demos, you name it) and by
participating in the communities and social media your customers are likely
to be.
Develop your “Get Customers” Strategy
Make your information as rich and inviting—and widely available—as
possible and cast the widest-possible net when people begin their search.
Provide helpful, non-sales-y information that leads them back to your
product, app, or site. Then the selling process begins.
Use the way people make decisions to guide your acquisition and activation
strategy:
1
. 
Determine who your audience
 is, then your goal is to be prominent
wherever they spend time on the web. Skateboarders don’t read 
The
Wall Street Journal
 or TechCrunch very much, so focus on
skateboarding sites, blogs and the like.
2
. 
What kind of content
 will they find attractive? Our skateboarders
probably prefer illustrations, games, and videos over long essays and
white papers. Reach them with the kinds of content they’ll find most
interesting and helpful, such as tips on safer skateboarding or bolder
tricks, not long essays on the finer points of boarding.
3
. 
Make sure your content works
 in the location. Quora, Twitter, and
Facebook users expect short, interesting items and get bogged down
with or ignore long ones. Social networks don’t have much use for
lengthy sales pitches. Be sure your content “fits” where you put it.
4
. 
Participate in the communities
 your customers are a part of. Answer
questions, provide feedback, offer tips, and gently invite people to
explore your product.
5
. 
Create content that people want to link to
. Whether it’s helpful tips,
FAQs, cartoons or fun videos, make your content the kind of content
your customers want to share with friends. The result extends your
invitation to those friends more often than not.
Customer Acquisition Tactics to Test
The best way to get this started is to put your initial acquisition test plan into
a spreadsheet outlining the activities, their costs, and each program’s goals.
See a sample acquisition-plan spreadsheet in the 
“Activate Plan”
 section of
Chapter 8. Acquisition begins by using free or earned web-media
opportunities to acquire customers, since “free” is obviously the best cost.
The web offers many free crowd-sourcing or acquisition opportunities (SEO,
social media, viral marketing, buzz and more).
Earned or free acquisition tactics:
Public relations:
 Generate small “test” amounts of news and feature
coverage about the problem (not the product itself) on websites, blogs
and social nets. Don’t publicize the product or solution until customer
validation, it’s just too early. (Public relations doesn’t mean hire an
expensive outside agency. During customer discovery, you should be
learning this firsthand.)
Viral marketing:
 This often-confused term refers to three types of
acquisition marketing, each used in different web/mobile channels. The
three are perhaps the most important customer acquisition tactics for
web/mobile marketers, because they’re all free or inexpensive to
implement. This is discussed in 
“grow” customers
 where viral activity
encourages customers to refer others
Search engine optimization
 (SEO), an unpaid, or “natural,” search
option, directs consumers to the product or service
Social networking
 encourages friends and early customers to blog about
a product or a company, use Facebook to “like” it, or use Twitter and
other tools to broadcast personal recommendations
After you get the free acquisition programs going, you should start to
test paid tactics.
Paid acquisition tactics:
It’s hard to determine how much money to spend on acquisition tactics, in
part because there are so many variables: how much funding you have, how
confident you are in your hypotheses, and how hard it is to find your
customers are three of the key considerations. Obviously, free tactics are
better than paid tactics when they deliver quality customers with strong LTV
in sufficient numbers to create a great business. As a rule, however, life is
seldom that easy, and you’ll need to test a blend of paid tactics along with a
wider variety of free ones.
Here are some of the most common web/mobile paid acquisition tactics you
should consider:
Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising: targetable, accountable paid search
advertising on Google and other search engines drives targeted traffic to
the company
Online or traditional media advertising: often used to introduce a new
product or service
Affiliate marketing: other related websites are paid to drive traffic to the
product site or app.
Online lead generation: purchase of permission-based e-mail lists to
solicit interest (much trickier and more highly regulated for direct-to-
mobile-phone messaging)
Review the list of “get” customers tactics from the physical channel to
see which ones warrant testing for your web/mobile startup. Candidates
certainly include advertising, direct mail, and everything from zany on-street
promotions to blimps, billboards and more.
Some quick and simple acquisition tests:
In 
Phase 2 of customer discovery
 you’ll run some small-scale acquisition
tests with the free and paid tactics described above to test your understanding
of the customer 
problem/need
. In Phase 3 of customer discovery, you’ll again
use acquisition tools to gauge initial customer reaction to the MVP and
discover whether the MVP is a compelling solution to the problem. These are
limited and targeted tests, not a product launch. Press releases make no sense
here, for example, since wide dissemination could either bring too many
customers or create the false impression that the product is “launched” and
finished.
Your Phase 2 & 3 acquisition tests should be limited to controllable,
inexpensive, easily measured tactics like these:
     •   
Buy $500 worth of AdWords
 and see if they’ll drive customers
representing five or 10 times that amount in potential revenue to the
site or app and at least get them to register. Test at least two different
headlines and as many calls to action, carefully monitoring the
performance of each. Drop ineffective ones and refine the best
Viral marketing can’t start until there is a customer
base to viralize.
 
     •   
Use Facebook messages or Tweet
 to measurable audiences to invite at
least 1,000 people to explore the new product. Test several different
messages or invitations to be sure the messaging about the product 
is
clear. If none of the messages delivers engagement or registrations,
the product or offer may well be the problem
     •   
Viral marketing:
 Getting customers can’t start until there’s a customer
base to viralize. There are several types of viral marketing, so review
the viral discussion in the previous section (and also 
here
). Network-
effect businesses should consider viral activities sooner
     •   
Post referral banners
 using Commission Junction to get sites offering
your offer. Spend $1,000 in referral fees to relevant websites (usually
$12 per referral). If the banners run and the money’s largely unspent,
move on
     •   
Buy an e-mail blast list
 of targeted customers for $500 or $1,000. Send
at least two versions of the offer and expect to generate at least three
times the potential revenue to at least sign up, if not a purchase
     •   
Traffic partners
 are another important source of users or customers that
fuel the “Get” effort. These are typically contractual relationships
with other companies that provide predictable streams of customers or
users to your company while you provide either customers or fees to
the partner. This is so important to most web/mobile businesses that
it’s addressed in its own 
“traffic partners” hypothesis
Who’s Creating This Content?
Successful web/mobile startup teams have a combination of skills: great
technology skills (hacking/hardware/science), great hustling skills (to search
for the business model, customers and market), and great user-facing design.
The co-founder who’s the user-interface/design expertise owns content
creation. Ideally he or she is talented enough to create it without legions of
hourly-rate agency folk around. Use 
guru.com
 and 
craigslist.com
 to find
talent, cost-effective freelancers with good references.
Customer Activation Tactics to Test:
Activation is the second step in getting customers. As discussed earlier, this
is where the customer either makes a purchase or, at a minimum, raises a
hand and says, “I’m interested, contact me.” Activation could be an
exploratory visit your website or free mobile app to see how a game is
played, a comment posted on a blog or social network, or the use of a free
search engine. At the other end of the spectrum, low-cost mobile apps and
other products find transactions to be the best initial activation, since the
product may be a free version or cost only 99 cents.
Activation is the choke point... where customers
decide whether they want to participate, play or
purchase.
 
For web/mobile businesses, 
activation is the choke point
—the make-or-
break place where customers decide whether they want to participate, play, or
purchase. Here, unlike the physical channel, the “product is the salesman,”
encouraging visitors to explore, try, or read about the product on their own,
without pressure or patter from a sales representative. Activation is always
encouraged by a compelling value proposition, well-communicated and
coupled with a good, clear offer and a low-fidelity (in discovery) or hi-
fidelity (in validation) MVP. Start by creating an activation-tactics plan in
simple spreadsheet form as in this 
example
.
Many startups falsely assume that because their customers are online,
online communication is all their customers want or expect. Very often, even
a single phone call can make a dramatic difference in acquisition and
activation rates. In some instances, as few as half the customers who discover
a product online will activate or buy without human-to-human contact. And
the presence of a phone number is known to communicate the company’s
authenticity. Just the presence of the company’s phone number—even if
never called—can increase its online click-through rate by five percent 
to 30
percent. (When adding a phone number, be sure it’s answered promptly,
knowledgeably, and effectively by someone with incentives to activate the
caller.)
Acquisition and Activation in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 3.12)
Some quick activation tests:
     •   
Capture the customer’s e-mail address
 and get permission to follow up
with further information. Follow up with 1,000 customers and expect
at least 50 or more to agree to activate
     •   
Offer incentives for activation:
 Offer a free trial, download, or white
paper or a significant discount to 500 or 1,000 customers. Try this
with at least three different offers, hoping to find at least one that
generates a 5 percent or greater response rate. Keep testing until you
do, and then calculate the revenue model based on response rates, and
costs
     •   
Call 100 prospects who don’t activate immediately.
 See if the phone
calls generate enough of a response-rate improvement to warrant the
cost. Three times the response rate is probably needed
     •   
Free-to-paid conversion:
 Offer a seven- or 14-day free trial of an app,
service, or web/mobile product. Then compare the total 60-day
acquisition revenue with the Get results of the typical paid offer. Or
offer the use of some but not all of the site or app’s features.
eHarmony.com
, for example, lets people find their ideal matches for
free but requires paid enrollment to tell your dream date that you’ve
discovered him or her
Even a single phone call can make a dramatic
difference in acquisition and activation rates.
 
     •   
Use free-download websites
 to offer free downloads or trials. Make
sure the revenue generated over a 90-day period exceeds that of the
standard activation offer
Monitor the results of all tests and, when you’re not satisfied (or it fails
your pass/fail test) revise the program and test again.
Keeping Customers (Customer Retention)
The “Keep Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 3.13)
Keeping customers in the web/mobile channels has the same goal as
retention efforts in the physical world: to minimize customer churn/attrition
by providing great products and services, and interacting with customers
often. (At this point in customer discovery, there aren’t customers to retain,
so identify retention programs to test in the future.) Retention is done more
easily online, where companies have the incredible power and ability to track
and monitor every single prospect’s or customer’s individual behavior or lack
of behavior (without violating their privacy).
“Keep Customers” Tools in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4b)
Loyalty and points programs and other tactics borrowed from the
physical channel can also play a significant role here, as can elegant
personalized customer service and support, conducted digitally as much as
possible. Strong digital help tools, FAQs, user blogs, clubs, and newsletters
help with retention as well.
Customer Retention Strategy
Retention programs live or die by a close monitoring of customer behavior to
learn who’s staying and who’s leaving and why. It’s critical to instrument the
product not in order to track everything but in order to follow the most
important customer behaviors you want to improve.
For example:
Track start dates and sources of each customer (referred by a blogger,
another site, etc.)
Track customers’ activity level individually. How often do they come?
How long is each visit? What’s the time span between visits?
When do customers abandon, and what were they doing that caused
them to do so?
Monitor customers’ behavior on-site: what do they click on, what don’t
they click on?
Track customer referrals to others and the sources and activity level of
referred visitors
Track the results of each promotion, whether outbound or on the site
itself
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an
overview/tutorial. There’s no way you can implement all this or even
process this in one sitting.
 
Keep the following guidelines in mind as you test:
E-mail is easy to ignore and at times feels like spam, so be careful about
overly relying on it. At least four of five e-mails are never opened, and
consumers often unsubscribe from self-serving marketing e-mails
Consumers often resent “faux” personalization. People appreciate
legitimate, helpful personalization if they’ve opted in for example
(“Here are the sneakers we have in your size, 11D” is far better than
“Great buys for Bob”)
Don’t get lazy and make automated marketing and e-mail programs your
only customer-retention efforts. Focus on great product, product
enchancements, terrific service and other core retention initiatives
Embrace social networks as points of retention. Use them to keep
visibility high and to invite customers and friends back often
The key for retention for web/mobile channels is that the data customers
have given you make personalized retention efforts easy. But you need to
collect it. Observe each customer’s behavior and interact with customers
based on what they do or don’t do.
Track the behavior of each customer individually. Use that data to create
a personal one-to-one relationship that guides him to the next steps the
company wants him to take. (But always respect personal-data privacy.)
Retention programs live or die by a close
monitoring of customer behavior.
 
Simple Retention Tests to Consider:
The hypothesis should include some core initial retention efforts that will be
discussed during discovery and tested on a modest scale later, during
customer validation. Be sure to include digital versions of relevant programs
outlined in the 
physical section
. Some specific tactics to test:
     •   
Outreach programs,
 including welcome e-mails, how-to guides, and
phone calls thanking the user for coming aboard and offering simple
tips on how to get more out of the product. Consider retention e-mails
like these:
          
   We haven’t seen you visit in two weeks. Is everything OK?
          
   I’ve noticed you’ve had a few problems. How can we help?
          
   Have you seen some of the new features on our site?
          
   Here are five “power user” ideas for getting more out of your time
at XYZ.com
     •   
Blogs, RSS
 and news feeds to further engage customers or users with
the product or site
     •   
Loyalty programs
 that encourage and reward repeat visits, purchases, or
referrals borrowed from the physical channel
     •   
Contests and special events:
 webinars, special guests, new features, and
other reasons for current customers to come back
     •   
Mobile app push notifications:
 iOS/Android gives developers the
ability to push messages to users even when the app is closed. For app
developers, getting this right is critical to retention and customer
engagement
     •   
Product updates and enhancements
 to the actual product itself always
drive loyalty and retention (and communicating them to customers
helps)
Getting new customers is painful and costly, so
keeping those already on the roster is easier and
more cost-effective.
 
     •   
Placing live phone calls to users
 several weeks or (if annual) a month
or more before contract renewal is a good option if you have a
subscription revenue model. Make them friendly, service-oriented
calls, but always listen for signs of potential churn and be ready with
a deal, discount or offer to save the customer. Remember: getting new
customers is painful and costly, so keeping those already on the roster
is easier and more cost-effective
     •   
Tips-and-tricks newsletters
, time-triggered e-mails every seven or 14
days based on users’ on-site behavior or lack of visits
     •   
Personalized customer service and support
, conducted digitally as
much as possible. Strong digital help tools, FAQs, user blogs, clubs,
and newsletters help with retention as well
     •   
Customer lock-in/high switching costs:
 If it’s relatively easy for your
customer to switch from your products to your competitors’ (in an
existing market) you’ll probably have a higher churn rate. You may
want to consider tactics to “lock in” your customer to your product or
solution (through unique technology, data that can’t be transferred—
think Facebook and LinkedIn—or high startup costs with a new
vendor.)
Monitor Specific Retention Metrics
Monitor and act on at least these basic retention metrics:
signs of dwindling visits, page views or time spent on the site or app
increased time between visits
average customer life (how long they stay active) and, if possible later,
lifetime value
increases in complaints, help or support tickets
reduced response rates or open rates on company e-mails
Organize the metrics around “cohorts,” or common groups of customers
(like “those who joined in January”), since, for example, three-month
customers may behave one way while nine-month customers may be much
more or less active than their newer brethren. (This is addressed in detail in
the 
retention-optimization discussion
 in Chapter 9.)
Growing Customers (New Revenue and Referrals)
The “Grow Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
(Figure 3.14)
There are two ways to grow existing customers: get current customers to
spend more money or encourage them to send more customers to the
company. These programs are detailed in Chapter 9 (
Optimize Getting More
Customers
). By then your company should have a sizeable number of
customers to grow!
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an
overview/tutorial. There’s no way you can implement all this or even
process this in one sitting.
 
“Grow Customers” Tools for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4c)
1. Get Current Customers to Spend More
Getting current customers to buy more starts by making sure they’re satisfied
with the product, performance and price. Then you try to sell them more
product, upgrade their service, or extend their contracts. These activities are
important for the long-term, so test at least a few during customer validation.
Some of the basic approaches to Grow Customers include:
Cross-sell programs
 that encourage buyers of a product to buy adjacent
products. Getting buyers of toner cartridges, for example—to buy paper,
pencils, and other office products
Up-selling programs
 that promote the purchase of “more” of higher-end
products. For example, buying cases of toner rather than single
cartridges, or the purchase of copiers, fax machines and other office
machines along with the toner
Next-selling programs
 that concentrate on the next order: can the
company encourage a long-term toner contract, sell the customer
envelopes to put the copies in, or become his primary office-products
supplier? These basic customer growth strategies work in consumer
goods as well as business-to-business
Unbundling
, which sometimes grows revenue. If a product is complex
or multi-featured, split it into several products, each sold separately.
This works well in many tech, software, and industrial product areas
For now, develop a hypothesis about how the company will grow its
customers, and test those ideas with—who else?—customers.
Some simple “grow” programs to consider:
Every “thank you” or confirmation page should suggest multiple items
the customer may also find interesting, and ideally provide an incentive
for doing so
New items, special offers, and discounts for increasing the order size
should be prominent and integrated with the checkout process for high
visibility
e-commerece companies should have “recommendation engines.” “If
you bought X, you’ll love Y”
e-commerce companies should include special offers and discounts in
each shipment
e-mail customers to introduce new and different products or “add-on”
features to buy
Promote special sales and offers on new products or services the
customer hasn’t bought
Customer referral
s are the most common type of viral marketing,
although they obviously can’t begin until you actually have customers
(so it’s discussed in the “Grow” section). Viral marketing stimulates
referrals of customers from other happy customers. Generate attention
among the largest audience possible. Consider tools like YouTube and
conferences you can attend and perhaps speak or promote at. Encourage
friends of the company and its team to invite their friends to learn more.
Consider contests, sweepstakes and promotions to drive the reach of
viral efforts
Viral products
 help sell themselves. Hotmail, Gmail, Facebook and
many other web products end every customer communication by saying,
“Invite a friend to use our service.” When used, it’s powerful and
virtually free viral marketing
Network-effect virality
 boosts usage of products like Skype,
Photobucket, and even fax machines. You can’t talk via Skype with a
friend who doesn’t have it or fax someone without a fax machine, so
customers encourage others to join, expanding the network for their own
benefit. In the process, they get new users for the company
Customer referrals are the most “honest” source of
new business...
 
2. Get Customers to Send More Customers to the
Company
There are lots of different viral marketing tools and tactics that help you get
customers to refer other customers to the company. Here are the six most
powerful viral marketing techniques to consider:
Encourage customers to “like” the product on Facebook
Offer customers discounts or free trial offers to share with friends
Enable customers to e-mail their friends using their address books to
create mailing lists
Create contests or incentives to encourage Tweeting, “liking” and other
viral activities
Highlight social-networking action buttons on the site to make viral
efforts easy
Encourage bloggers to write about the product, and reward them for
doing so
(The customer relationship hypotheses should also address how the
“Get, Keep and Grow” programs will be optimized once they’re under way.
For guidance in these areas, see 
Optimizaton Plans/Tools
.)
Checklist 9: Customer Relationships
Goal
: How you’ll “Get, Keep and Grow” Customers in a web/mobile channel
Reference
: Chapter 3, Customer Relationships
  
Draw Your “Get/Keep/Grow” Funnel
  
Describe your “Get Customers” Strategy
     
  Acquire
     
  Activate
  
What are your “Get Customers” Tactics?
     
  Search (SEM/SEO)
     
  Viral
     
  PR
     
  Trials
  
Describe your “Keep Customers” Strategy
     
  Interact
     
  Retain
  
What are your “Keep Customers” Tactics?
     
  Customization?
     
  User groups? Blogs?
     
  Loyalty or other physical channel programs
  
Describe your “Grow Customers” Strategy
     
  Incremental customer revenue
     
  Referrals
  
What are your “Grow Customers” Tactics?
     
  Upgrades
     
  Contests
     
  Up-sell/Cross-sell
     
  Viral
Exit criteria:
     
  A preliminary first hypothesis of all Get/Keep Grow activities
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Customer Relationships Hypothesis 
(Physical)
This customer-relationship brief describes how you 
get
 customers into your
sales channel, 
keep
 them as customers and 
grow
 additional revenue from
them over time.
The “Get, Keep, Grow” Funnel in Physical Channels
 (Figure 3.15)
While 
Figure 3.15
 illustrates the flow through the process, 
Table 3.3
provides an overview of the most widely used activities, by channel, for each
step in the “get, keep, grow” process. In this hypothesis we’ll focus on the
column on the left: the physical channel.
Every company, whether its product or channel is physical or
web/mobile, can summarize its mission in three succinct phrases: build great
products; “get, keep, and grow” customers; and make money directly or
indirectly from these customers. Customer relationships are the strategies and
tactics to 
get, keep and grow
 customers.
Getting
 customers, sometimes called demand creation, drives customers
into your chosen sales channel(s).
Keeping
 customers, or retention, gives customers reasons to stick with
the company and product.
Growing
 customers involves selling them more of what they’ve bought
as well as new and different products and encourages them to refer new
customers.
“Get, Keep and Grow” are among the most
important hypotheses for any startup.
 
“Get, keep and grow” are among the most important hypotheses for any
startup. You will die without customers and these are most expensive parts of
any company. The diagram in 
Figure 3.15
 provides an overview of the entire
customer relationship life cycle. This hypothesis will “dissect” the diagram,
starting on the left from “awareness,” the first step, and proceeding through
each of the many steps in the “get, keep, grow” process.
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 There is no way you can implement all
this or even process it in one sitting. What follows is an overview of all
the things you need to consider as you shape a marketing strategy that’s
best for your startup.
 
Developing Customer Relationships in the Physical
Channel
Customer Relationship Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.5)
Think of the “get customers” process as a “funnel” in which the greatest
number of potential customers—those on the left—have awareness of the
product. The number of potential customers declines as their interest grows,
as they consider buying, and then as they make the actual purchase. During
customer discovery, you’ll launch a series of small-scale, inexpensive “get
customers” experiments to determine the tactics that move customers into and
through the funnel in a repeatable, scalable, and cost-effective way. Later,
once you have customers, you’ll begin customer retention activities to 
keep
the customers and use upselling, cross-selling and customer referral programs
to 
grow
 the number of customers and the revenue.
“Get Customers”
Getting customers, or demand creation, has four distinct stages in the
physical channel: 
awareness, interest, consideration,
 and 
purchase
. See
Figure 3.16
.
The “Get Customers” Funnel for Physical Goods
 (Figure 3.16)
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 There is no way you can implement all
these alternatives at once or even process them in one sitting. What
follows is an overview of all the things you need to consider as you
shape a marketing strategy that’s best for you.
 
Awareness
 lets potential customers know about your product or service
(think TV commercials shouting “new airline” or radio ads saying, “Now you
can fly cheaper”). It gets people thinking about the product or service.
Interest
 means the message is no longer being ignored even if the
prospect isn’t ready to act. Think of people saying, “I should try one of those
low-cost airlines sometime,” as a result of the initial awareness effort. One
more push could move this prospect to the consideration step.
Consideration
 follows interest when the message is powerful enough or
contains a convincing offer that might lead to the thought, “Why don’t I take
JetBlue on my trip to Florida next month?” Consideration may take the form
of a free trial where it’s offered.
Purchase
 follows consideration. It’s clearly the desired result of “get”
activities.
Creating demand for a consumer electronics product sold on Walmart’s
shelves is different from opening a chain of pizza parlors or selling a new
type of semiconductor. And while the description of customer relationship
activities may seem simple at first, it’s actually the result of a complex
interplay among customers, the sales channel, the value proposition and the
budget for marketing activities. When you get it right, it all comes together in
a repeatable, scalable, profitable business model.
Develop Your “Get Customers” Strategy
Earned and Paid Media Feeding the “Get Customers” Funnel
(Figure 3.17)
The first three funnel stages—awareness, interest, and consideration—happen
in the consumer’s mind, out of reach of anything other than your advertising
messages. The first two stages—awareness and interest—are out of your
control until the customer identifies herself or himself to some channel like a
retailer, a direct-sales rep, or a website and says, “I’m interested.” (This could
happen when the customer leaves a business card at a trade show, requests
more information online, or talks with a company representative.) The “get
customers” activity moves customers as far into the funnel as possible until
the customer self-identifies and the channel takes over the “consideration”
and “purchase” activity. But it all starts with awareness.
“Get Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.5a)
An important caution: be aware of the way the physical-channel has
changed in the past decade.
 Whether a product is sold at a car dealership, a
gravel pit, a 7-Eleven or the trendiest retail boutique, 21st-century consumers
begin their search for products online. So online marketing is every bit as
important to marketers in the physical channel as it is to their web
counterparts. Your job as a marketer is to be sure customers can easily find
your product or service on the web. This means that physical-channel
marketers need to pay almost as much attention to the next section of this
chapter—
“Web/Mobile Customer Relationships”
—as they pay to this one.
(For best results, read both sections before beginning the tasks outlined
here.) Marketers in the physical channel must embrace basic web-marketing
tactics at every opportunity—websites, AdWords, online advertising—even
in the unlikely event that your product isn’t for sale online. Online, your job
is to “pull” customers 
to your product so they can discover it online, even if
they then buy it at your warehouse, at Walmart or face-to-face from a sales
representative.
Awareness, interest, and consideration in the physical channel are
primarily driven by two types of communication tactics: 
earned (or free)
media
 and 
paid media
.
Earned media
 is the free exposure a company generates. In the physical
channel, it includes press releases, product reviews, editorial features and a
range of “guerrilla marketing” tactics such as handing out fliers at trade
shows where the company doesn’t buy a booth. These tactics are often
favored by startups because they’re far less expensive than paid media
efforts. Many consumer products find their first customers through free
sample or trial programs or by handing out samples or discount coupons on
street corners.
The downside of earned media: unlike paid media, which run on specific
dates and locations, editorial coverage is unpredictable and runs—or doesn’t
—as editorial space or the product’s news value allow.
Online marketing is every bit as important to
marketers in the physical channel as it is to their
web counterparts.
 
Paid media
 is exactly what it sounds like: media exposure that’s
purchased on TV, blimps, direct mail or the web. This kind of activity can
cost literally millions of dollars when rolled out, so customer discovery
employs small-scale tests to see which tactic will deliver the best results later,
at product launch.
Other paid-media awareness-creation tactics that aren’t free include
advertising, trade shows, direct mail, catalogs, events, telemarketing, and in-
store promotion. Most physical-channel marketers also promote their
products online, of course. During customer discovery your spending will be
low until you successfully test a tactic and prove that it generates leads and
sales cost-effectively.
Simple “Get Customer” Tactics to Consider
Build a “get customers”-hypothesis spending spreadsheet that lists:
the free and paid media programs
what the company hopes to achieve and at what cost
Before conducting these or any other tests of customer-relationship
tactics:
     1.  Create a “pass/fail” metric for each “Get” test that defines whether it
worked and should be expanded. An example: will we get one sales
call for every 30 phone calls made to prospects?
     2.  Consider a methodology for improving the results of each test, such as:
If the call blitz doesn’t work, we will e-mail first and then call each
prospect twice.
     3.  Be sure the tests are objectively measurable so that the big spending
decisions that follow aren’t made based on the fact that “it felt good”
or “seems to work well.” JetBlue’s metric for radio ads might seek to
generate reservations-hotline calls at a cost of $1 each. The logic: they
can spend $3 on marketing (sometimes called customer acquisition
cost) to sell a round-trip ticket, and one caller in three buys a ticket on
average.
     4.  Don’t forget that people buy from people. Create, don’t avoid,
opportunities to talk via phone or in person with potential customers.
There are few more powerful sales tools!
Most companies selling through the physical
channel will use a variety of web/mobile marketing
tactics...
 
     5.  Remember that most companies selling through the physical channel
still use a variety of web/mobile marketing tactics to gain awareness
and sales for their products, so be sure to include elements of
web/mobile “Get” programs from the next section.
The sample spreadsheet in 
Figure 3.17
 charts the costs and expected
results of the “get” efforts for a startup’s new heavy-duty, $2,500 printer sold
to businesses through office-products stores. The spreadsheet is used to be
sure the program tests are affordable.
Sample Customer Relationship Program Spreadsheet
Earned Media
Paid media
Program goals
   
50 sales plus 60 inquiries, 10% of the inquiries convert
Total
   
56 sales, 54 prospects
Total cost/sale
   
= $140.00 (8700/56) vs. profit/sale of $300.00
√ This is a good test
Sample Customer Relationship “Tactics to Test” Hypothesis
(Figure 3.17)
“Keep Customers”
As the “Get” customers exercise clearly illustrates, getting a new customer is
an expensive process. Thus it’s important to think now about how the
company will 
keep,
 or retain, customers it’s worked so hard to get. When
customers cancel a subscription, never return to a supermarket, or close a
corporate purchasing account, it’s called “churn” or “attrition” (the opposite
of retention!).
The “Keep Customers” Funnel
 (Figure 3.18)
Develop Your “Keep Customers” Strategy
“Keep Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.5b)
For any customer retention strategy to work, first the company must
deliver on all its promises that got the customers to buy in the first place.
Customers need to love the product or service, and every customer-facing
aspect of the business model has to perform exceptionally, from customer
service and support to complaint-handling, delivery, billing, and more. First,
a steady stream of product upgrades and enhancements should always keep
the product ahead of competition. By their nature, these are core-value-
creation activities and should be addressed in the value proposition
hypothesis.
Next, begin to think about programs that reach out to customers
proactively to strengthen or bolster retention. This can be as simple as placing
(often quite powerful) outbound calls to be sure customers are happy or as
complex as a multi-tiered loyalty-points program to reward repeat purchases.
In a startup’s early days, it’s hard to test the impact of loyalty programs, since
the results need to be measured over long periods of time.

In a startup’s early days, it’s hard to test the impact
of loyalty programs...
 
In addition, consider loyalty programs such as points, rewards and
discounts as well as long-term retention incentives like multi-year contracts.
Make them part of the hypothesis, and test them where possible during
customer validation.
Finally, consider other parts of the business model canvas. Are there
things your partners can do to help you keep customers? Other resources you
can use?
Simple “Keep Customers” Tactics to Consider
: During customer
discovery, put together plans and then test some basic, inexpensive “Keep”
activities to see how they perform. Use the test results to guide future plans in
customer validation and creation. Some simple programs to test and consider:
Loyalty programs:
 How you will use loyalty programs to retain
customers. Read more about 
loyalty programs
 in the customer validation
section and address them in this hypothesis.
Customer check-in calls:
 Put together a plan to call every customer, or
every fifth customer, once a month or once a quarter simply to thank
them for their business and see how they like the product. While you
have them on the phone, probe for questions they have about the
product, features or functions. (By the way, e-mail is still a poor
substitute for a voice or Skype connection.) Over time, target at least a
15 percent improvement in repeat sales or renewals from customers
who’ve talked.
Launch a customer-satisfaction survey:
 Whether on the web or by mail
or e-mail, plan to check with customers about their use of and
satisfaction with the product or service. (Probe for complaints or lack of
use, and reach out to any who express problems. Look for at least a 15
percent reduction in churn from those who’ve been contacted.)
Send product-update bulletins:
 Create simple tip sheets or user notes on
how customers are making the most of the product. (Send them to all
users, and offer a prize for users whose tips are published later. This is
difficult to measure precisely but inexpensive to implement.)
Monitor customer-service issues:
 Customers who complain frequently
are most likely to churn. (Get proactive with these customers, fix their
problems, and make them happy. Far fewer complainers should leave if
they’ve had their problems addressed.)
Customer lock-in/high switching costs:
 If it’s relatively easy for your
customer to switch from your products to your competitors’, you’ll
probably have a higher churn rate. You may want to consider tactics for
“locking in” customers to your product or solution (through long-term
contracts, unique technology, or data that can’t be easily transferred).
It’s 5-10x cheaper to keep a customer than to
acquire one.
 
Longer-Term Customer Retention
: Customer retention is effective only
when the customers self-identify so they can be contacted by the salesperson,
channel partner, or company representative charged with keeping them happy
and coming back to buy more. As you learn more about individual customers
over time, retention becomes increasingly individualized and targeted based
on the observed and measured customer behavior. This subject is more fully
addressed during customer validation, when there are more customers to
think about keeping.
Specific retention metrics to monitor and act on include:
purchase patterns: volume, frequency, slowdowns or halts
participation in “grow customers” programs (described in the next
section)
number of complaints to customer service, refund requests, problems,
and the like
participation, activity levels, redemptions in loyalty and incentive
programs
Retention programs live or die by a close monitoring of customer
behavior to learn who’s staying and who’s leaving and why. You’ll organize
the metrics around “cohorts,” or common groups of customers (such as “new
customers signed in January”). Three-month customers, for example, may
behave one way while nine-month customers may be more or less active than
their newer brethren. (This is addressed in detail in the 
retention-optimization
discussion
.)
“Grow Customers”
Once a company has a customer, why not sell them more, since it costs less
than acquiring new customers? Most startups think only about the revenue
they receive in their first sale to a customer, but smart companies think about
the revenue they can get over the lifetime of the relationship they have with a
customer. Measuring customer lifetime value can be important when
computing a startup’s potential. Describe how the company will get more
revenue from its existing customer base with programs that sell more and
encourage customers to refer new ones to the company.
The “Grow Customers” Funnel
 (Figure 3.20)
Develop a “Grow Customers” Strategy
“Grow Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.5c)
Your “Grow” strategy will have two key components: get the customers you
have to buy more, and get them to refer other customers to you. A few
“Grow” tactics only work in the physical channel, such as:
“Upsell” offers such as “spend $25 more and get free shipping”
In-pack promotional mailers of offers, coupons, and samples
Specials or premiums only available to customers who meet with a sales
rep
Direct mail is also an effective customer growth tool, of course.
Increasingly, however, physical channel marketers are turning to online
marketing rather than postal mail because of its speed, lower cost, and the
ability to target better. 
You should also study the discussion of 
“Grow”
strategy and tactics in the web/mobile section
 for many more ideas.
 This will
help you shape your initial programs to grow your customer base through
additional sales and referrals.
It’s difficult at this time to think through and test extensive “Grow”
customers programs because you have very few customers to test them with.
Far more detail is provided in the customer validation step, when there are
enough customers aboard your “Grow” programs.
Key Resources Hypothesis
This brief identifies external resources critical to the company’s success and
how you’ll find and secure them.
Key resources fall into four main categories: 
physical
, 
financial
, 
human
and 
intellectual property
. In each relevant category, create a list of the key
resources you’ll require, what you expect to pay, and where you’ll go to find
them.
Physical resources:
 These fall into two types: company facilities and
product/service resources. Examples of company facilities are office space
and company location (near mass transit to more easily attract lots of
employees, in a city with great restaurants, etc.). Product/services may
include a steady supply of superthin silicon wafers or iron ore or thousands of
feet of warehouse space or specialized lab or manufacturing space. Many
resources are capital-intensive, particularly where physical goods are
concerned—manufacturing equipment, raw materials, and the like.
...many of the capital-intensive resources have
become utilities or can be outsourced.
 
In the 21
st
 century, many of the capital-intensive equipment or services
resources companies used to need to physically own and pay for have
become utilities or can be outsourced. For example, startups that need
computing and server capacity can buy processing power and storage, in the
cloud, from 
Amazon.com
 and many others (slashing the cost of a software
startup by a factor of 10 or more). Manufacturing that used to be a capital-
intensive is now outsourced to Asia (with an equally significant reduction in
cost). IT and services can be done cheaper in India, etc.
Financial resources:
 Money is the lifeblood of startups. You stay in business
until you run out of it. This book is about how to reduce startup infant
mortality by making everything you do less wasteful and more cash-efficient.
There are tons of articles, websites and entire books on how to raise
money for a startup—and whom to raise it from. Friends and family, crowd
funding, angels, venture capital and corporate partners are the usual suspects.
But don’t overlook government grants as an alternative funding source for
new ventures. In the U.S., the 
grants.gov
 website is the first stop for a number
of sources such as SBA (Small Business Administration) and SBIR (Small
Business Innovation Research) grants.
Companies selling physical products have additional sources of capital:
Equipment lease line.
 This lets you finance the entire purchase price of
business equipment or commercial vehicles. Typically offered by a
bank, a lease line can be a great solution whether you need to preserve
working capital for other expenses or you’re in an expansion phase and
need financing
Factoring.
 If you’ve sold product to a customer who takes a while to
pay, you can sell your accounts receivable (i.e., the invoices) to a third
party (called 
a factor)
 at a discount. It provides your company with
immediate cash
Vendor financing.
 This is a loan arrangement that takes place between
your company and a vendor that supplies large volumes of their product
to you. The vendor lends money to you so you can buy products from it
Don’t forget the 
Human
 Resources
Human resources fall into three categories: personal advice (mentors,
teachers, and coaches), company advisors, and qualified employees.
Teachers, coaches, and mentors
 are people you’ll need to help you
advance your 
personal
 career. If you want to learn about a specific subject,
find a teacher. If you want to hone specific skills or reach an exact goal, hire
a coach. If you want to get smarter and better over the course of your career,
find someone who cares about you enough to be a mentor.
Advisors are
 people you’ll need to help advance your 
company’s
success. Founders fail when they believe their visions are facts. Listening to
advice based on 
experience can help you sort through whether your vision is
a hallucination. Getting an advisory board (by expanding your circle of
accumulated wisdom beyond your investors) is so important that it’s an
explicit step in the Customer Development process.
Qualified and motivated employees
 are the difference between a good
idea that never goes anywhere and a billion-dollar firm. Will your company
need dozens of specialized engineers or coders or designers as it grows? If so,
where and how will you find them? Is your city or location a magnet for
world-class talent? Is there a shortage of talent? Will offshore teams be
required as the company scales, and how will you select and manage them?
In more specialized industries (think avionics, chip design, and biotech) this
may be even more challenging if scaling the team quickly is important,
especially if the company is headquartered in a smaller or off-the-beaten-path
location to where you’ll have to relocate much of your talent pool in order to
employ them. If you’re in a part of the country or the world where the
number of potential employees is limited, how can you be more creative to
get them? Identify what the human resource needs are now and what they
will be two to three years later to be sure that growth won’t be constrained.
Intellectual Property is a Key Resource
Intellectual property
 gives you rights to stop others from using your
creativity. The assets you can protect may include your “core technology,”
such as source code, hardware designs, architecture, processes, and formulas.
Or it can be your brand, logo or domain name. You can protect business
processes, know-how, customer information, and product roadmaps.
Protection is also available for content such as music, books, and film. Some
of these assets are protected automatically. For other classes, it’s wise and
sometimes mandatory to go through a registration, application or examination
process to get full protection.
Trademark:
 A trademark protects branding and marks and gives you the
right to prevent others from using “confusingly similar” marks and logos.
Trademark protection lasts as long as you use the mark. The more you use the
mark, the stronger your protection. Trademark registration is optional but has
significant advantages if approved.
Copyright:
 A copyright protects creative works of authorship, typically
songs, books, movies, photos, etc. Copyright gives you the right to prohibit
others from copying, distributing or making derivatives of your work. It
protects “expressions” of ideas but doesn’t protect the underlying ideas. (If
your product is software, copyright is also used to prohibit someone from
stealing your software and reselling it as machine and/or source code.)
Copyright protection lasts practically forever. Registration is optional but is
required for suing for infringement.
TYPES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION
Types of Intellectual Property Protection
 (Table 3.6)
Contract:
 A contract is a binding legal agreement that’s enforceable in a
court of law. There’s no official registration process; you have whatever
protection is defined in the contract (e.g., a nondisclosure agreement gives
you certain rights to protection of your confidential information). The
protection lasts for the time period defined in the contract.
Patents:
 A patent is a monopoly the government grants to prohibit
others from making, using or selling your invention, even when the other
party’s infringement is innocent or accidental.
Just about anything can be patented—circuits, hardware, software,
applied algorithms, formulas, designs, user interfaces, applications, systems.
Scientific principles or pure mathematical algorithms may not be patented.
Your invention must be “nonobvious.” The test for whether it’s nonobvious
is: given the prior art at the time of the invention, would a typical engineer 1)
identify the problem and 2) solve it with the invention? You must be “first to
file.” You must file in the U.S. within a year of sale, offer for sale, public
disclosure or public use. Your patent application has to include a written
description with details of the claims of the invention. The details have to
allow others to duplicate your invention from your description and have to
use the “best mode” in describing critical techniques/technologies. And it has
to identify all prior “art,” or solutions to the problem.
Patent protection typically lasts 15 to 20 years. There is a formal
application and examination process. Each patent filing will cost your
company $20,000 to $50,000 and take one to four years to complete. Filing
of patents is frequently of major interest to people funding your company.
(There’s something called a “provisional patent” that’s an alternative to a full
patent. It allows you to claim “first to file” and use the term 
patent pending.
Provisional patents get into the patent office quickly and cheaply. However,
they automatically expire after one year, and no patent rights are granted.
Provisional patents are a good placeholder because they’re cheap to file and
don’t get in the way of your other patent efforts.)
Intellectual Property Creates Value
Intellectual property is an asset for your company. You need to acquire,
protect and exploit it. You can map out an intellectual property strategy by
asking:
Who are the key players and technologies in its market(s)?
What are the most important ideas and inventions that need patents (or
provisional patents)? Start filing these early!
What are the important patent applications that come next?
Four Common Intellectual Property Mistakes
Startups Make
1.   
Founders didn’t make a clean break with previous employer:
 Do your
employers or university own or have a claim on your inventions? It’s a
very subjective standard, and since startups don’t often have resources or
time to spend on lawsuits, large companies and universities may use
threats of litigation to ensure that you don’t take anything. Therefore the
best advice is to “take only memories.”
2.   
Your startup cannot show that it owns its intellectual property:
 Take the
time to create a clear, well-documented chain of title (think lab
notebooks) to your intellectual property. If you’re using independent
contractors, make sure you have written agreements assigning work
created. Make sure you have Employee Invention Assignment
Agreements. (If you hire subcontractors or friends to do some work, get
assignment agreements as well.)
3.   
You lost your patent rights due to filing delays/invention disclosures:
 In
the U.S., patent rights are forfeited if you wait more than a year after:
     •   disclosure in a printed publication (white paper, journal/conference
article, website)
     •   offer for sale in the U.S. (start of sales effort, price list, price quotation,
trade-show demonstration, any demonstration not under NDA, public
use in the U.S.)
     In most foreign countries, there is no one-year grace period.
4.   
Your company grants “challenging” licenses to intellectual property:
Startups acquiring their first customers may give special licensing terms
in key markets, territories, etc.—e.g., a grant of “most favored nations”
license terms or other licensee-favorable economic terms. This can make
your intellectual property less valuable to future buyers of your company.
Or you may cut a deal that you can’t assign or transfer (or can’t get out
of) if you get acquired.
There May be Other Key Resources
Consider other external business elements that are vital to the company’s
success. Celebrity websites need a steady stream of “hot” gossip (this one
shouldn’t 
be a problem) and 
MarthaStewart.com
 wouldn’t be much without
Martha. 
Overstock.com
 would fail without a stream of good-quality discount
merchandise.
Dependency Analysis
The company’s dependency analysis basically answers the question “To sell
our product in volume, what has to happen that’s out of our control?” Things
out of a company’s control can include other technology infrastructure that
needs to emerge (all cell phones become web-enabled, fiber optics are in
every home, electric cars are selling in volume). Dependencies also include
changes in consumers’ lifestyles or buying behavior, new laws, changes in
economic conditions, and so on. Specify what needs to happen (let’s say the
widespread adoption of telepathy), when it needs to happen (must be
common among teens by 2020), and what happens if it doesn’t happen (the
product needs to use the Internet instead). Note the benchmarks you’ll use to
measure whether the change is happening when needed.
Identify all key resources in this hypothesis, and explain how the
company will make sure those key resources are readily available. Be sure to
identify the risks of their unavailability, as well as alternatives that will
minimize impact on the company’s business model. Be careful not to confuse
partners (to be discussed next) with resources.
Checklist 10: Key Resources Hypothesis
Goal:
 Identify external resources critical to the company’s success, and how
the company will find and secure them
Reference
: Chapter 3, Key Resources
Describe the all key resources costs, and how they will be acquired
     
  Physical resources
     
  Financial resources
     
  Human resources
     
  Intellectual property
     
  Other key resources
     
  Dependency analysis
Exit criteria:
     
  Physical, financial, human, intellectual property resources required
     
  What they will cost
     
  Where they’ll be found
     
  How they will be secured
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Traffic Partners Hypothesis
 In addition to the four types of partnerships in the 
physical channel
section
, there’s a fifth, vitally important type of partner for web/mobile
startups: 
traffic partners
. Traffic partners deliver people to websites and
mobile apps several ways:
on a “cross referral,” or swapping, basis
on a paid-per-referral basis
by using textlinks, on-site promotions and ads on the referring site
by exchanging e-mail lists
As detailed later in 
Phase 3 of Customer Validation
, these traffic deals
are as difficult to negotiate as they are important. Develop your hypothesis by
identifying the target partners, what you want them to do, and how your
startup will reciprocate in cash or in kind.
Partnerships can sometimes be the lifeblood of a startup. Some examples
to consider in thinking about traffic partnerships of your own:
Zynga
, the online-gaming juggernaut, is overwhelmingly dependent on
its partnership with Facebook, the only place where Zynga’s popular
Farmville and other games are played. Without the partnership, Zynga
would have little traffic or revenue
YouTube
 got much of its early traffic through a partnership with Google,
so much so that Google bought the company
Salesforce.com
 drives traffic and revenue to web/mobile sales and CRM
applications through its AppExchange
Mobile apps
 get much of their traffic from dot.com partners
Niche content
 retail sites often have similar active partners
Other partnerships
 unique to web/mobile channels can also be quite
important: App stores and marketplaces are critical partners for mobile apps,
since they’re the apps’ principal channel. (Learn much more about this in the
channels section.) Understand how they work, their willingness to partner,
and the costs. And credit card issuers are often overlooked as partners. They
sometimes look askance at web content, social networking, gaming and e-
commerce businesses (particularly startups and sellers of web/mobile goods),
since the card issuers have been burned so many times by un-scrupulous
entrepreneurs. The result: rigid rules that are often biased against startups.
Identify traffic partners your startup will need initially and as it grows.
Develop a prioritized list of the must-have and best-to-have partners in each
category. Later, in 
Phase 3 of Customer Validation
, you will conduct
meetings with prospective partners to determine if they’re interested and what
they will need to make the partnership a mutual success.
Checklist 11: Partners Hypothesis
Goal:
 Identify essential partners and the company’s “value exchange” with
each
Reference
: Chapter 3, Partners and 
Traffic Partners
Understand Potential Partner Types
     
  Strategic Alliances
     
  Joint new business efforts
     
  Coopetition
     
  Key suppliers
     
  
Traffic Partners
List your target partners
     
  Necessary partners
     
  What they will provide
     
  How the Company will reciprocate
Exit criteria
:
     
  Understand potential partner types
     
  List target partners, their contributions and what the company will offer
in return
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Note to reader: These following guidelines, geared for physical channel
startups, are invaluable to web/mobile startups as well.
Partners Hypothesis 
(Physical)
Key partners often provide capabilities, products, or services that the startup
either can’t or would prefer not to develop itself. Batteries for a flashlight
maker or design services for a website are two simple examples. But the most
famous is Apple and the iPod. Without the record labels providing music as
content, the iPod and iTunes would simply be another hardware/software
player. The partners made the business model the juggernaut it is today.
The key-partners hypothesis names the essential partners your company
will require, along with the “value exchange” with each one (as in “we give
them money, they send us customers”). Partnerships generally fall into four
key areas: 
strategic alliances
; “
coopetition
,” or cooperation between
competitors; 
joint new business development efforts
; and 
key supplier
relationships
.
Think of this hypothesis as a simple three-column spreadsheet. The
headings: partner name (list primary and runner-up candidates), “what they
provide,” and “what we provide.” Don’t feel bad when the word 
money
appears repeatedly in the third column. It’s fairly typical for startups, at least
in their early days.
Strategic alliances,
 generally between noncompetitive companies, can
often shorten the list of things your startup needs to build or provide to offer a
complete product or service. For physical products, alliance partners might
provide product training, installation or service, peripherals or accessories,
whether they’re sold under your startup’s brand name or not. Specialized
service firms in many industries (law, accounting, engineering, IT) can often
market a wider range of services by combining their services with those of
other specialists. Alliances can also be used to broaden a startup’s footprint,
making its product more available in geographies where the startup itself
can’t support sales or service.
Joint new business development efforts
 generally happen later in a
startup’s life, but can be important once the startup has established its own
identity and brand. Dell and HP sell lots of software and products made by
others, but seldom do so until 
they’re confident the product has significant
consumer demand. Think of these as longer-term opportunities to investigate
as part of your customer discovery process.
“Coopetition”
 similarly happens later in a startup’s life, as a rule. It’s a
form of working with a direct competitor to share costs or market together.
New York City’s “fashion week” is a good example of coopetition for
established fashion houses. While they’re fiercely competitive, they work
together to coordinate fashion show schedules so the top buyers can attend all
the key showings. Word for Mac is perhaps the greatest coopetition example
of all time, but both companies were well-established before the product was
developed and launched.
Key supplier relationships
 can mean life or death for a startup. Imagine
how tough it would be to churn out millions of iPhones without Foxconn, the
massive Apple manufacturing partner in China, or to make Ben & Jerry’s
famed Cherry Garcia without an uninterrupted supply of delicious cherries.
Suppliers can be instrumental to any company’s success, but tight, flexible
partnerships can be absolutely critical. Many startups outsource a variety of
“back office” functions, ranging from warehousing and fulfillment of
physical goods to HR, payroll, benefits and accounting. These outsource
suppliers act as extensions of the company that leverage the suppliers’
expertise to improve the startup’s efficiency and cost structure.
Will the partner flex its delivery times, order-size requirements, credit
terms or even its price in your startup’s early days? How will the partner
ensure a steady supply that rises (quickly, we hope) or falls in line with
customer demand? Identify the key suppliers in this hypothesis, along with
what you’ll need from them. You’ll visit with them later to validate this
hypothesis and understand your role and theirs in forging a mutually
beneficial relationship.
Revenue and Pricing Hypothesis
The revenue and pricing brief may well be the toughest of all, but it’s
critically important, since it ensures that the business model makes financial
sense. In a way, this brief is elegantly simple, since it asks only four
questions:
1
. 
How many of these things will we sell?
2
. 
What’s the revenue model?
3
. 
How much will we charge?
4
. 
Does this add up to a business that’s worth doing?
Revenue Sources,
 (Figure 3.20)
While some of the issues differ from channel to channel, the process of
computing your company’s revenue is fundamentally the same, regardless of
channel. The good news: much of the work for this brief is already complete.
Question 1: How Many Will We Sell?
In the physical channel, companies generate revenue by selling their product,
collecting revenue either as a one-time sale, via time payments, or through
such financial tools as leasing or subscriptions. They also solicit referrals
from current customers, often rewarding customers for referring others.
Collect the following revenue stream components from hypotheses
completed earlier:
Market size and market share hypotheses, which should translate into
the anticipated number of customers (as in 10 percent of a million-
person market = 100,000 customers)
Channel hypotheses, along with estimates of their volume potential and
channel costs
Be sure to include (subtract, really) the channel’s cost of sales, which
can be enormous, since the company only gets to “count,” or keep, net
revenue received after channel costs are subtracted. (Enthusiastic
entrepreneurs make this mistake far too often)
 Question 2: What’s the Revenue Model?
Web and mobile products in particular have a wider variety of potential
revenue sources than their physical channel cousins.
 (Product sales are the
prime revenue source for physical products.) 
Direct revenue sources to
review and estimate include:
Sales: Product, app, or service sales are the principal revenue source for
many web/mobile startups, typically in a one-time transaction that may
also lead to follow-on sales
Subscriptions: Software, games, and other online products are often sold
by a monthly subscription
Pay-per-use: Some web products (travel sites and eBay are two simple
examples) earn revenue on a “per use” basis, with subscription or
discounted volume purchases optional
Other web/mobile resources may include:
Referral revenue:
 payments for referring traffic or customers to other
web/mobile sites or products
Affiliate revenue (revenue sharing):
 finder’s fees or commissions from
other (typically e-commerce) sites for directing customers to them
E-mail list rentals:
 subscription and membership sites often rent their
customer e-mail lists to carefully selected advertiser partners
Back-end offers:
 add-on sales from other companies offered as part of
registration or purchase confirmation processes,
When it comes to advertising sales, two fundamental rules apply. First,
the more distinctive, unusual, or hard to reach an audience actually is, the
more a marketer will pay to reach it. Private pilots or people who travel on
private jets are far more valuable than “travelers,” and “active multiplayer
gamers” are worth considerably more than teens.
Rule number two: very few marketers or advertisers will be interested in
small audiences, even if the product or site is destined for huge audiences
down the road. The “friction” costs of research, contracts, and paperwork
required just to reach a few thousand (or sometimes half a million) people is
often just not worth it to an advertiser. Research this question with
prospective revenue sources and factor the responses into the revenue
calculation.
Question 3: How Much Do We Charge? (Pricing
Tactics)
This is a two-part question. Part one assesses the costs of doing business. For
physical products, this is often far more important. If you’re selling canned
peas or microwave relay towers, there’s a clear, sizeable cost of the physical
product itself: parts, assembly, packaging, shipping, and more.
In business-to-business and some consumer sales, other issues warrant
consideration, such as total cost of operation (if rent is high or staff is huge,
or the electric bill is a high component of product cost).
Part two of the “how much will we charge” question is simple: “what’s
the price?” You will start testing your pricing hypothesis later in discovery,
but first there’s a bit more work to do.
A good pricing model recognizes Market Type, accommodates
manufacturing costs, the value the product delivers, market beliefs, and
competitive prices. It also charges “as much as the market will bear” to
maximize profits. For best results, start with a deep understanding of
competitive pricing.
 In web/mobile channels, pricing is much more transparent and
almost always easily found online, which heightens the need to monitor
competitive pricing.
Startups have lots of choices in selecting their pricing models. Among
the most popular pricing models:
Value pricing:
 Based on the value delivered by the product rather than
the cost itself. Investing or accounting software tools, unique patented
products and pharmaceuticals can sometimes optimize profits with this
model
Competitive pricing:
 Positions the product against others in its
competitive set, typically in existing markets
Volume pricing:
 Designed to encourage multiple purchases or users, in
situations ranging from office supplies to SAAS software
Portfolio pricing:
 For companies with multiple products and services,
each with a different cost and utility. Here the objective is to make
money with the portfolio, some with high markups and some with low,
depending on competition, lock-in, value delivered, and loyal customers
The “razor/razor blade” model:
 Part of the product is free or
inexpensive, but it pulls through highly profitable repeat purchases on an
ongoing basis. (Think of the cost of ink-jet printers compared with the
cost of the ink.) Often challenging for startups due to the upfront cost
Subscription:
 While now thought of as a software strategy, the Book of
the Month Club pioneered this for physical products
Leasing:
 Lowers the entry cost for customers. Provides constant
earnings over a period of years
Product-based pricing:
 Based on a multiple of actual product cost.
Usually for physical goods. (Typically priced for maximum
revenue/profit versus volume)
 This calculus is very different for a web/mobile product, where the
incremental cost of a new customer is practically zero, as it is for a
multiplayer game app that adds, say, 50 new customers to its system at a cost
measured, at most, in pennies per customer.
Two Business-to-Business Pricing Issues
Total Cost of Ownership/Adoption (TCO)
: More an issue in business than
in consumer sales, the TCO analysis estimates the total cost to customers of
buying and using the product. For business products, do customers need to
buy a new computer to run the software? Do they need training to use the
product? Do other physical or organizational changes need to happen? What
will deployment across a whole company cost? For consumer products,
measure the cost of “adopting” the product to fit consumer needs. Do
customers need to change their lifestyle? Do they need to change any part of
their purchasing or usage behavior? Do they need to throw away something
they use today?
Return on Investment (ROI)
: When setting prices for sales to
corporations, your company may have to prove to them the purchase price
was “worth it,” or that they got “a good deal,” which may be less about price
than about the total return on their investment. As a rule, companies focus
more on ROI than consumers do, partly because of the size of and oversight
on large transactions. ROI represents customers’ expectation of their
investment measured against goals such as problem-solving, productivity,
time, money and resources. For consumers, return often includes status or
style and sometimes even just plain fun.
When selling to businesses, prepare a hypothetical ROI in advance of
initial customer meetings. (This is often a good subject for a helpful white
paper.) If the solution doesn’t return a meaningful multiple ROI, sales may be
difficult. That $50,000 robot vacuum system as a replacement for a $5,000
annual cleaning bill may be a tough sell, especially after a good job on the
TCO (maintenance, electricity, parts and more) as part of the ROI
computation.
Question 4: Do Revenues Point to a Business Worth
Doing?
You have to do more than multiply the volume by the average selling price to
get the answer to this question, but don’t worry—this answer doesn’t need to
be precise just yet. Remember, the goal of customer discovery is to refine a
business model enough to test it on a larger scale in the next step, customer
validation. So at this point, with a rough view of the gross revenue and all the
fixed and variable costs involved, make a rough computation of the
following:
Is the revenue adequate to cover costs in the short term?
Will the revenue grow materially if not dramatically over time?
Does the profitability get better as the revenues get bigger?
Again, this is a rough, back-of-the-envelope calculation used only to
decide if what you found in discovery moves your forward to customer
validation. It’s not an accounting exercise.
Web/mobile markets are often multi-sided.
 
 How Single and Multi-Sided Markets Affect
Financials
Companies with physical products most often have “single-sided” markets:
customers who buy the one product the company makes.
Web/mobile markets are often multi-sided. When a web/mobile startup
plans to first focus on amassing huge numbers of users, eyeballs, or clicks
and to “figure out the revenue model later,” this implies a multi-sided market.
Multi-sided markets have a different business model for each side of the
market.
 Typically, the business model components that change include value
proposition, customer segment, customer relationships and revenue stream.
One side, the users, is measured in eyeballs, page views, referrals, or
hours rather than dollars. The other side of the market, the customers,
consists of advertisers who pay to reach the users. Hundreds of millions of
Facebook users think of it as a free social network, and indeed, Facebook
makes its money from a completely different customer segment (advertisers)
with a completely different value proposition through a different channel
(direct sales and online self-service).
Calculate the revenue model for that second side of the market—the
payers—right now. Understanding what an advertiser is willing to pay to
reach your startup’s audience is vital to the business model.
Remember, you have limited resources. Focus first on the one key, big
source of revenue before expanding into secondary sources, which can be
distracting to the company.
Two More Revenue Issues to Consider
Distribution Channel Affects Revenue Streams.
 Calculating revenue is
easy for a product sold directly by your own sales force: You simply deduct
any discount you gave the customer from the list price of the product. When
you sell through indirect channels, revenue calculations might be harder.
Selling to Walmart is wonderful, but most retails channels have “return
rights.” (If your product doesn’t move off their shelf, you have to take it
back.) Are you selling to OEMs where the discount is steep and the revenue
to your company doesn’t appear until the OEM begins selling in volume?
Consider Lifetime Value
: How much will the customer ultimately spend not
just in the first sale but over the life of his or her relationship with the
company? SAAS software, dating websites, and online gaming focus on
customer lifetime value. Customers can sign up for 
salesforce.com
, for
example, sometimes for a few dollars a month, but the company no doubt
spends several times that amount to attract and sign a new user. Why?
Because it understands that the average 
salesforce.com
 subscription lasts
many months, making the new customer worth a multiple of the monthly cost
—provided, of course, that the company stays in business long enough to
collect the revenue. (On the other hand, the lifetime value of a demolition
contractor’s typical customer often approximates his first invoice.)
Customer lifetime value dramatically affects revenue stream and pricing
strategy, online or off, although other than magazine and newspaper
subscriptions, which are declining rapidly, there are scant few subscription
products beyond gym memberships among physical products.
Final Draft of a Business Model Hypothesis
 (Figure 3.21)
Tie the Components of Revenue Together in a
Hypothesis
Revenue stream and pricing interact with the value proposition, the channel,
customer relationships, and the other business model components. That
means there’ll be lots of iterating and pivoting. The revenue stream
hypothesis will be tested repeatedly before it’s cast in stone, first in customer
discovery discussions and again with more customers as part of customer
validation. When the draft of the revenue stream brief is complete, re-validate
it to see that the math adds up. Ultimately, only one answer matters: can we
generate enough revenue, profits and growth to make this business worth our
time and energy?
Completing the Hypothesis Development Process:
This brief completes the company’s only large-scale paperwork exercise. The
action now moves outside the building so you can start to understand what
potential customers need and to qualify or refine the initial hypothesis
assumptions. But before doing that:
Convene a team meeting where a large copy of the latest business model
canvas and briefs are taped to a wall. A summary of each of the briefs
should be adjacent to the canvas
All participants should read each of the business model briefs
Look at the summaries on the canvas, read the details in the briefs,
discuss them as a team, and look for obvious conflicts or
inconsistencies.
Founders, product development, engineering and operations teams
should again validate cost assumptions and changes
Return to the first hypotheses developed to be certain there’s no conflict
from one to the next. Does the sales channel make sense, for example, in
light of the pricing, need for installation, etc.? Will fewer customers still
adequately fund overhead and development?
Review and agree on the final versions of each hypothesis
Make certain the hypothesis summaries agree with the summary in the
appropriate business model box
Update the business model as appropriate
Now it’s time to move ahead and get out of the office, where customers
and facts live.
Checklist 12: Revenue And Pricing Hypothesis
Goal:
 See if the business model makes financial sense
Reference
: Chapter 3, Revenue and Pricing Hypothesis
How many will we sell?
     
  Market Size & Market share hypotheses
     
  Channel hypothesis
What’s the Revenue Model
     
  Sales?
     
  Subscriptions?
     
  Pay-per-use?
     
  Referral?
     
  Affiliate?
What Are the Pricing Tactics
     
  Value pricing
     
  Competitive pricing
     
  Volume pricing
     
  Portfolio pricing
     
  Razor/razor blade model
     
  Subscription
     
  Leasing
     
  Freemium
     
  Etc.
     
  Does it Add up to a Business Worth Doing?
Exit criteria
:
     
  The units/users, revenue model and pricing add up to a business worth
doing
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 4
Customer Discovery, Phase Two: “Get Out
of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do
People Care?”
P
HASE
 2 
GETS THE TEAM “OUT OF THE BUILDING”
 to test the problem and to
answer three key questions:
Do we really understand the customer’s problem?
Do enough people really care enough about the problem for this to
become a huge business?
And will they care enough to tell their friends?
The next section, 
Phase 3
, will test to see whether the product offers a
compelling solution to customers who have said there’s a problem. When the
“problem” and “solution” questions are answered with a resounding “yes,”
product/market fit is achieved and it’s time to move on to customer
validation.
 This problem phase is markedly different for web/mobile startups,
where product development time is far shorter and feedback comes far faster.
Problem discovery is conducted with the development of a 
low-fidelity MVP
website or mobile app
. Sometimes as simple as a PowerPoint diagram or a
single web page, this early MVP helps gather immediate feedback about the
problem. Later, the solution is tested with a hi-fidelity MVP.
This phase includes five key steps:
designing experiments for customer tests
preparing for customer contacts and engagement
testing customers understanding of the problem and assessing its
importance to customers
gaining understanding of customers
capturing competitive and market knowledge
As this phase gets under way, here’s a reminder of the key rules from
the 
Customer Development Manifesto
 in Chapter 1:
Customer discovery is done by the founders
Hypotheses require testing. Testing requires experiments to be designed
Web surveys are nice, but always correlate them with face-to-face
customer feedback, even for web businesses
Customer meetings aren’t about learning whether customers love the
product, at least not yet. They’re about understanding the problem and
how urgently your potential customers need to solve that problem.
You’ll focus more on the product itself once you’re certain the problem
it solves is big enough to create a market worth going after
Initial hypotheses rarely survive feedback without iterations or pivots
Design Tests and Pass/Fail Experiments
At this point, your Phase One business model hypotheses are still just
“guesses.” In this phase you’ll turn those hypotheses into facts by getting out
of the building and 
testing
 them in front of customers.
Here’s an easy way to visualize this: think of a three-layer business
model. The bottom layer represents your initial vision of the startup. The
second layer outlines the detailed hypotheses you just developed in Phase
One. The third layer shows the tests you’ll conduct to verify and measure
each hypothesis, turning guesses into facts as you do, so that the business
model can be verified and measured.
Business Model/Hypotheses/Tests
 (Figure 4.1)
But how do you test? 
Rule number 6
 of the Customer Development
Manifesto says to 
design experiments
 and 
Rule 9
 says to do it with 
speed,
tempo
 and 
fast cycle time
. So the first step in running a test of your business
model hypotheses is to 
design simple pass/fail experiments for each test.
Next you run the tests, and then you gather the data and not only try to learn
something from the test but also try to gain some insight. The
Hypotheses/Experiment/Test/Insight loop is shown in 
Figure 4.2
 below.
Hypothesis/Design Experiment/Test/Insight
 (Figure 4.2)
Regardless of whether it’s a physical or web/mobile product, Customer
Development experiments are short, simple, objective pass/fail tests. You’re
looking for a strong signal in the noise. The pass/fail tests give you a “good
enough” signal to proceed.
Start by asking yourself, “What do I want to learn?” Then ask, “What’s
the simplest pass/fail test I can run to learn?” Finally, think about, “How do I
design a pass/fail experiment to run this simple test?”
For example, a Customer Relationships hypothesis for a physical
product may have assumed that for every 10 sales calls three people would
move into active consideration of buying. The experiment might be as simple
as making the same presentation to 30 prospects and having the experiment
“pass” by coming away with nine or more orders or letters of intent.
 A web business model hypotheses for Customer Relationships and
Revenue Model may have assumed that you can acquire 5,000,000 customers
by spending $1 million on Google AdWords. Your pass/fail experiment
might take the form “we believe we can acquire visitors with Google
AdWords at a cost of 20 cents per click.” Your experiment would create three
different landing pages, allocating $500 in AdWords to each, and
sequentially testing each landing page (using the same AdWords) every other
day. A “pass” would get 2,500 clicks per page. Anything less, the hypotheses
failed. (A secondary test that falls out of this is which page got the customers
the fastest!)
Most of the time you can mock up the web page or
create a demo or prototype to elicit valuable
learning.
 
Tests
One of the things that trips up engineering founders is thinking that these
hypotheses tests have to be actual code, hardware or the real product. Most of
the time you can mock up the web page or create a demo or physical
prototype to elicit valuable learning. Nor do the tests involve large sums of
money or large amounts of time. When you get a strong “grab it out of your
hands” on, say, from four of your first ten customers, it’s OK to stop the test
and declare it a success. The goal is speed, learning and looking for a global
maximum (not a local maximum).
What’s a global maximum? Let’s say you run a free trial offer for three
days on your great new weekend getaway website and you get 50, then 60,
then 80 signups in the first three days. You might say, “Wow, 80, that’s
great,” and end the test. But on day four, the sun comes out. Had you run the
test for only two more days, you might have discovered your “global
maximum,” 500 signups a day. Only experience and good guesswork can tell
you how long to run a test, and while shorter is always better, be sure you’ve
given yourself the opportunity to reach your global maximum.
Global Maximum versus Local Maximum Response Rates
 (Figure 5.3)
The next steps in 
Phases 2
 and 
3
 and in 
customer validation
 provide
details on how to set up tests for both web/mobile and physical products.
Insight
The goal of these experiments/tests is not just to collect customer data. Nor is
it to simply get “pass” on the pass/fail experiments. And it’s not just to learn
something, though we hope you will.
It’s something more profound, intangible and what makes
entrepreneurship in the end still an art. It’s the fact that 
you’re looking past
the data – you’re looking for insight.
 Did you get thrown out of sales calls
time and again but you remembered someone said, “Too bad you don’t sell x,
because we can use a ton of those.”
Checklist 13: Design Tests
Goal:
 Devise experiments for testing the Business Model Hypotheses
Reference:
 Chapter 4, Design Tests and Pass/Fail Experiments
     
  List key areas to learn
     
  Design simplest pass/fail tests
     
  Run Tests
     
  Process for tracking learning and insights from test results
Exit criteria:
     
  Objective pass/fail tests for testing Business Model Hypotheses
     
  Process for tracking results
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Build Your Low Fidelity MVP
 The tests to qualify your web/mobile business model hypotheses will
have you engage thousands of customers in discussions about their problem
or need. You’ll do this by developing a 
low fidelity
 minimum viable product
that answers two critical questions: do you understand the customer problem
or need, and when you do, do lots of customers care?
This low fidelity MVP test makes sure the problem or need your
company will address is an urgent one for customers.
You’ll build the low fidelity MVP in this step and run the actual tests in
the next step.
The 
Low Fidelity
 MVP Strategy
As discussed in 
Phase 1
, the low fidelity MVP can be as simple as a landing
page with your value proposition, benefits summary, and a call to action to
learn more, answer a short survey, or preorder. Or it can be a quick web-site
prototype in PowerPoint or built with a simple landing-page creation tool.
More experienced web developers can build a functional user interface with a
wireframe prototyping tool and build a working low-fidelity website. No
matter what, this is a very basic website without fancy U/I, logos, or
animation.
Get the MVP live as quickly as possible (often the day you start the
company) to see if anybody shares your vision of the customer need/
problem. Start with a low-fidelity website that:
describes the problem’s severity in words or pictures (“Does your office
look like this?”)
describes the problem, encouraging users to “sign up to learn more”
shows screen shots of the solution (“pay your bills this way”)
Consider other simple MVP components like a YouTube video showing
or discussing the problem, a short online survey on the issue, or a blog asking
visitors their opinion.
In the next step, you’ll invite consumers to respond as thoroughly as
possible, giving them several options for doing so. Start by asking for a
response as simple as signing up to learn more. The next most important
measure is whether they’ll rush to tell lots of their friends, which tests the
visitor’s view of the importance or magnitude of the problem, or the
excitement around the thought of a new online game, for example.
The third step invites more detailed feedback via an e-mail or a survey
tool or by asking the viewer if she’d welcome a call to discuss the new
product or company. Remember: the more a visitor is asked to do, the less
likely it is she will respond. So be sure to have the simplest, most basic
response mechanism—like “sign up to learn more”—most prominent on the
MVP.
 
The tools listed in this section are examples. That are not recommended
or preferred, just representative of what’s available. New tools appear
daily. Do your homework and check 
www.steveblank.com
 for the latest
tools.
 
How to Build a 
Low Fidelity
 MVP
For non-coders:
Make a quick prototype in PowerPoint or use Unbounce, Google Sites,
Weebly, Godaddy, WordPress or Yola
For surveys and preorder forms, Wufoo and Google Forms can easily be
embedded within your site with minimal coding
For coders (tips for building the user interface):
Pick a website wireframe prototyping tool (i.e. JustinMind, Balsamiq)
99 Designs is great for getting “good enough” graphic design and web
design work for very cheap using a contest format. Themeforest has
great designs
Create wireframes and simulate your low-fidelity website
Create a fake sign-up/order form to test customer commitment.
Alternatively, create a “viral” landing page, with LaunchRock or
KickoffLabs
Embed a slide show on your site with Slideshare, or embed a video tour
using YouTube or Vimeo
Do user interface testing with Usertesting or Userfy
By the way, don’t underestimate the long-term value of design and the
importance of user interface. At times even friends and relatives would look
askance at an MVP that’s so crude it seems like the person who created it is
totally out of his depth. But the goal at this stage is not U/I perfection. It is to
test a problem. It could be done with a sock-puppet if the test were set up
correctly.
Consider Using Multiple MVPs
Many startups develop multiple low-fidelity websites to test different
problem descriptions. For example, a simple online accounts payable package
can be simultaneously tested three different ways: as fastpay, ezpay, and
flexipay. Each addresses three different accounts payable problems—speed,
ease of use, and flexibility. Each landing page would be different, stressing
the “ease of use” problem, for example. As a simple test of the problem, first
buy Google AdWords for each URL and present the problem three different
ways, in the AdWords space and on the landing page. Next, you would rotate
the listings so each is on top of the Google stack exactly one-third of the
time. (If nobody clicks, return to the start of this chapter.) Which approach
generates the most clicks? Which yields the most sign-ups? The most
referrals?
In the next step, you’ll turn on the low fidelity MVP you’ve built, and
see what happens in the next step. Good luck!
Checklist 14: Build A Low Fidelity MVP
Goal:
 Develop a low fidelity MVP to test and assure problem customers care
about the problem
Reference:
 Chapter 4, Build Your Low Fidelity MVP
Build a low fidelity website
     
  Splash or landing page with value proposition
     
  Benefits summary
     
  Call to action (learn more, survey, preorder)
     
  Multiple MVPs considered?
Exit Criteria
:
     
  A simple live website or prototype for testing whether customers care
about the app or site being developed
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Low Fidelity MVP Problem Test
 Now it’s time to see if anybody cares about the problem you’re solving or
the need you’re fulfilling. It’s time to gradually invite people to the MVP you
built in the previous step, see how they respond, and measure how and what
they do.
 
WARNING!! PROCEED WITH CAUTION.
 This step should be
taken gradually, as your new product is meeting the public for the first
time. Please resist the temptation to “go live” until you’ve read the next
few pages.
 
Just because the MVP is live doesn’t mean anyone will find it
(remember that the web is a vast place with zillions of sites). So start inviting
people to experience the MVP (at most, a few hundred at a time). Follow the
plan outlined in your “get customers” hypothesis, accelerating the pace of
customer acquisition slowly and watching every action or inaction closely.
After all, this is the first time your product hypotheses will actually meet real
customers, and the learning is likely to be intense.
Some of your hypotheses might be shot down in flames in the first hour
or two. For example, most entrepreneurs would change something if they
invited 50 friends to an MVP “problem” page and not a single one clicked or
signed up. Imagine your surprise if you bought a list of 1,000 mothers of
toddlers and three just accepted your invitation to join “toddlermom.com.”
The 
customer relationships hypothesis
 developed in Phase 1 details how
you’ll “get” potential customers to the MVP, app, or site. Review it and take
mini-bites of several acquisition and activation tactics you believe will bring
you hordes of customers. (Think of each tactic you’re planning as a jug 
of
fuel. Start with an eye-dropper full and check the results. If they look good,
as outlined in your hypothesis, pour in a tablespoon, a pint, or maybe a
quart.) Remember that this is a small-scale test to determine whether your
startup is solving a problem or need that customers care a great deal about.
There are three basic ways to invite people to engage on your site, and
you should likely use all three: push, pull or pay.
Push
 people toward your site or app by using e-mails, their friends, or
social media to get them there; 
pull
 them with SEO and pay-per-click or other
devices; and 
pay
 is just what it says—buy lists, clicks, or other tools that
deliver eyeballs.
“Push” Contacts Need Referral Sources
: Reach out to friends and contacts
using e-mails, texts, and social messaging tools such as Twitter, Facebook
and LinkedIn. Encourage them to e-mail friends and colleagues and to use
their Twitter, Facebook, Google+ and LinkedIn accounts to reach as many
other people as possible. Obtain the longest possible list of e-mail addresses.
Worry less about the details in these efforts and more about getting a big list.
An invitation always works better when it comes from someone known to the
recipient.
Provide a draft message your friends can use when reaching out on
behalf of the company. It should express support for the idea and the value of
exploring the problem. The e-mail should be short and as personal as possible
and should indicate a strong relationship between founder and sender.
“Pull” Strategies
: Pull can be ads, textlinks or AdWords and natural search
driving people to the MVP, app or site. Pull solves three problems:
There’s no need to cajole everyone for e-mail addresses
Only people interested in the issue, problem or need will respond
People who are pulled are more likely to respond, perhaps repeatably
Here are some ways to pull people into the discussion:
Google AdWords
display ads or textlinks on social networks (Facebook, et al.) or relevant
websites
press releases with links to a survey or site about the problem
getting bloggers to blog about the problem and invite commentary
exploring the many online feedback tools available
“Pay” for Contacts
: Buy lists of targeted business or consumer prospects.
Typically the least attractive startup option for obvious (cash) reasons, this is
usually the fastest option. A few to consider:
     
E-mail lists:
 Buy permission-based e-mail lists. The more narrow or
focused the targeting, the greater the cost. Response rates are still
challenging with this approach
     
Online survey tools:
 Buy a package of respondents, survey design,
implementation and a guaranteed number of targeted responses from one
of many suppliers such as Markettools
     
Established mobile data vendors:
 Vendors with credentials, high-quality
clients and high ethical standards are a must in this channel. Check
references thoroughly, since it’s easy to violate federal laws
     
Hire a publication:
 Some trade and online media will survey their readers
for you at a cost. It’s expensive but helps with targeting and response
because of the medium’s credibility
Missteps to Avoid when Testing the Low Fidelity MVP:
Customer discovery slips from the hands of founders and becomes a task
for specialists (consultants, employees, etc.)
Comments are summarized, averaged, and amalgamated, which tends to
blur or hide the most distinct “outlier” comments that often lead to
iterations and pivots
National laws on mobile messaging and privacy need to be understood
and respected. Penalties are substantial
Online tools provide very little chance for context and dialogue that
“drill down” in key discovery areas
As a rule, people pay far less attention when filling out online surveys
than they do in face-to-face conversation
Online feedback is not a substitute for leaving the building and talking
directly to customers, some of whom can be initially identified online.
Don’t let online interaction stand alone
You Don’t Have Real Data Until You See Their
Pupils Dilate
People lie on the web. And if you’re depending only on web data, you’ll
never know it. Correlate response you get online with “ground truth.” The
best way to do that is to interview some of the sources of your web data in
person. You don’t have real data until you’ve seen their pupils dilate.
In addition, in-person interviews can test how well your MVP is
explaining the need or problem, particularly if you show the customer several
MVPs and learn which they like best and why. Can the customer “play back”
the value proposition or problem statement after a brief explanation? Do they
get palpably excited, or do they politely meander through the discussion?
Talk about how extensively this problem affects their friends or coworkers
and whether they’d be likely to buy a problem that solves it. Keep a close ear
to the ground for outliers and comments like “It’d be much more important if
you did this” or “Isn’t that the same as product x, which never works right?”
Those one-off comments are where pivots and iterations in the business
model are most often found.
Drive Traffic and Start Counting
As soon as you can, begin e-mailing, Tweeting, calling, and inviting
everyone you know to come visit and react to the MVP. One of the strategies
of a web or mobile app is to instrument the product and measure and analyze
everything. Use web analytics to track hits, time spent on-site, and source.
For your initial site, Google Analytics may provide adequate information
with the fastest setup. Once you’ve moved beyond your initial MVP, you’ll
want to consider a more advanced analytic platform (Kissmetrics, Mixpanel,
Kontagent, etc.). Create an account to measure user satisfaction
(GetSatisfaction, UserVoice, etc.) with your product and to get feedback and
suggestions on new features.
Measure how many people care about the problem or need and how
deeply they care. The most obvious indicator is the percentage of invitees
who register to learn more. Next you need to learn if visitors think their
friends have the same need or problem, so include widgets for forwarding,
sharing and Tweeting the MVP.
Focus on the conversion rates. If the MVP got 5,000 page views and 50
or 60 sign-ups, it’s time to stop and analyze why. If 44 percent of the people
who saw an AdWord or textlink to the MVP signed up, you’re almost
certainly on to something big. What percentage of people invited to the test
actually came? What percentage of people in each test (a) provided their e-
mail address, (b) referred or forwarded the MVP to friends, or (c) engaged
further in a survey, blog, or other feedback activity? Of those who answered
survey questions, how many declared the problem “very important” as
opposed to “somewhat important?”
Specific questions, such as “Is there anything preventing you from
signing up?” or “What else would you need to know to consider this
solution?” tend to yield richer customer feedback than generic feedback
requests. If possible, collect e-mail addresses so you have a way to contact
people for more in-depth conversations.
A powerful way to test a problem uses the Net Promoter Score™,
developed by Satmetrix as a gauge of customer interest in the problem or
need. The Net Promoter Score asks customers to answer a single question on
a 0-to-10 scale, where 10 is “extremely likely” and 0 is “not at all likely”:
“How likely is it that you would recommend our company to a friend or
colleague?” Based on their responses, customers are categorized into one 
of
three groups: Promoters (9-10 rating), Passives (7-8 rating), and Detractors
(0-6 rating). The percentage of detractors is subtracted from the percentage of
promoters to obtain a Net Promoter Score. An NPS of +50 is considered
excellent.
Analyze the results carefully. Dissect the numbers finely to determine if
some customer segments or media drove particularly enthusiastic customers
to engage with the MVP. For example, if 92 percent of teen girls forwarded
the information to all their friends while nobody else expressed any serious
interest, your business may still be quite viable.
Consider the Scalability
: Not only is finding customers who care a daunting
challenge, you need lots of them to be successful. What if your startup
reaches break-even at 1 million activated users, for example (a modest goal
for many venture-backed web businesses)? In the customer creation phase,
you might need to invite 500 million people to visit—a potentially
backbreaking expense if you hope to activate a million users.
Here’s the math:
Number of people exposed to the site or product   
500,000,000
2% of those exposed are actually acquired (1 in 50)   
10,000,000
10% of those acquired become activated customers (1 in
10)   
1,000,000
customers
Unless customer acquisition is almost totally viral in this hypothetical
company, the costs of reaching 500 million people will result in running out
of money. To avoid it, be sure you’ve found an important, painful problem or
a serious customer need (then solve the problem or fill the need). The ability
to attract large numbers of customers will make or break the business. If
response rates don’t at least approach those in the customer relationships
hypothesis, it’s time to revisit the business model.
The “Just Do It” Scramble
Increasingly, even at this early stage of customer discovery, some investors
encourage startups to break all the rules and “just do it”—launch the product
even if it doesn’t exist. (Entrepreneurs are legendary rule-breakers anyway.)
That’s always an option, however your investors have a portfolio of 10, 20 or
more startups like you. Their bets are across the entire portfolio. You, on the
other hand, make a bet on a portfolio of one. There are times when tossing
this book out and “going for it” makes sense (market bubble, incredible
customer reaction to the concept, etc.), but make sure you understand why.
Checklist 15: Low Fidelity MVP Problem Test
Goal:
 Determine whether enough people care about the problem the startup
is solving or need it is fulfilling
Reference
: Chapter 4, Low Fidelity MVP Problem Test
  
Invite customers to the Low Fidelity MVP
     
  Push tactics
     
  Pull tactics
     
  Paid tactics
  
Collect e-mails for future contact
  
Measure response
     
  Raw web hits
     
  Conversion rates
     
  Time spent on site
     
  Source of users
  
In-person interviews in addition to online responses
  
Process for analyzing feedback, determining scalability
Exit criteria
:
     
  Robust customer interest in the problem or need
     
  High response rate to startup’s proposed solution
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Gain Customer Understanding
In addition to checking your assumptions about customer problems, you need
to validate your hypotheses about how customers actually spend their days,
spend their money and get their jobs done. Whether the product is for
corporate customers, a social network, or a new consumer electronic device,
you want to understand in detail how their lives or jobs work, how their
work/design flow happens and how they currently solve the problem or fill
the need.
If they’re in a business, are their jobs done in isolation? If not, how do
they interact with other departments? What other products do they use? Is the
problem they’ve identified limited to them, or do others in the company share
it? Is it possible to quantify the impact (dollars, time, costs, etc.) across the
entire organization? The same questions work for consumers. Will they use
the product themselves? Does it depend on others or their friends and family
using it?
You’ll want to check your assumptions about whether and how much
people will pay for your solution. What would make customers change the
way they do things? Price? Features? A new standard? If the customer’s eyes
haven’t glazed over yet, dip your toe into the hypothetical product spec. “If
you had a product like this (describe yours in conceptual terms), what
percentage of your time could be spent using the product? How mission-
critical is it? Would it solve the pain mentioned earlier? What would be the
barriers to adopting a product like this?” (If you’re a founder who has been in
the industry you’re entering, you may already be a domain expert and already
bring deep customer understanding.)
Since someday soon your startup will have to create demand to reach
these customers, use this opportunity to find out how they learn about new
products. Who are the visionaries in the press/analyst/blogging community
whom they read? Whom they respect?
Finally, never pass up an opportunity to spot talent. Can these customers
be helpful in the future? For the next round of conversations? For an advisory
board? As a paying customer? To refer you to other customers?
Your goal, after enough of these customer conversations, is to be able to
stand up in front of your company and say, “Here were our hypotheses about
our customers, their problems, and how they worked. Now here’s what
they’re saying their issues really are, and this is how they really spend their
day.”
Your goal is to understand the customer in depth. What does 
in depth
mean? It’s impossible to know their jobs as well as they do, but you should
be so thoroughly conversant with what truly matters to customers that you
can discuss their issues convincingly.
In business-to-business companies, experience the customer at work, or
at the very least observe it. Spend a day behind a cash register, at a trade
show, or at a conference the target customers are likely to attend. Buy lots of
coffees and have lots of casual conversations. Your goal should be to know
the customer you’re pursuing, and every aspect of his or her business, so
deeply and intimately that they start to think of you and talk to you as if you
were “one of them.”
Know the customer you’re pursuing so deeply they
think you’re “one of them.”
 
 Understanding customers for web/mobile applications starts with this
strategic view:
For consumer applications, the web is replacing the face-to-face social
interactions that people have had since we came down from the trees.
Friendships are taking on new meaning, having essentially moved online, to
social networks. Texting has replaced conversations, photo sharing has
eclipsed the sharing of snapshots, and online games have replaced board
games. “Traveling” salesmen spend more time on Skype and WebEx than on
the road and network through LinkedIn, Jigsaw and Facebook. Even
grandparents often video-chat as much as they visit.
Business applications have gone the same way.
So as you gather customer data, ask yourself, “What are we replacing?
Why? How will it change what people now do physically?”
Understanding Customer Interactions
 (Figure 4.3)
Tactically, it’s equally important to “become a customer” of existing
web/mobile products to get a feel for how customers are getting their jobs
done or needs fulfilled today. To do so, start to act like a customer:
Participate in their culture. Read their websites and publications, watch
their favorite videos, movies and TV shows, and share as many
customer experiences as possible
Get to know real live customers, not just in focus groups but in the
places where they really spend time. Observe when they’re online and
when they’re off and what they’re doing each time they pick up their
handheld: what app are they using, who are they texting or talking to,
why did they choose this minute to play game A instead of game B, and
how did they learn about games A and B in the first place?
Play the games they play, use the apps they use, participate in their
social networks and regularly visit the sites they regularly visit. You can
internalize the customer’s experience by observing it in depth and
understanding his behavior and motivation
Seek to understand, quantitatively, how and where they discover new
ways to spend their time. From friends? From the “top seller” lists on an
app store? On the airplane or the school bus?
The goal is to “become the customer.”
Checklist 16: Gain Customer Understanding
Goal:
 In-depth understanding of potential customers
Reference:
 Chapter 4, Customer Discovery, Get Out of the Building to Test
the Problem. Do People Care?
  
Research and Customer interviews
     
  How customers’ money and time are spent
     
  Current workflow
     
  Pain or need
     
  Current solution and cost
     
  How workflow would change with startup’s product
     
  Customer publications
     
  Customer influencers
  
Spend a day doing what customers do
  
Attend customer events
  
Become a customer
     
  Their websites and publications
     
  Online experiences
     
  How and where they spend time
     
  How and where they discover new ways to spend time
  
Report card for recording information learned
  
Process for analyzing data collected
Exit criteria
:
     
  In-depth understanding of customers, what they read, who they listen
to, how they work, spend leisure time and money
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Traffic/Competitive Analysis 
(Web/Mobile)
 The tools and tactics for 
developing market knowledge in the physical
channel
 work equally well in the web/mobile channels. Start by searching the
web and attending conferences, trade shows and other events to uncover great
market insights. In addition, meet-ups of local groups focused on certain
industries, particularly in the tech world, can be a great source of market
knowledge, as can webinars conducted by competitors.
Web-market knowledge should deliver a complete understanding of the
company’s competitors and how potential customers solve the problem or
address the need.
Use free traffic-measurement tools to compare and
understand the traffic generated by each
competitive product...
 
Use free traffic-measurement tools like Alexa and Compete to compare
and understand the traffic generated by each competitive product or website,
along with the traffic sources, growth trends, and demographic information
where available. Much of this information is available for free, including the
keywords driving traffic to the site, specific lists of sites linking to it and, in
some cases, demographic and income data on site visitors. 
Compete.com
offers side-by-side comparison of multiple url’s, for example. Visit “answer”
sites like 
Quora.com
 and start asking questions. This will cause more market
information to surface and probably lead to new sources of expertise on
product, category or market.
Mobile startups should visit every app store for each appropriate
platform to identify competitors and their categories. Where do the
competitors rank within the category, and is that rank ascending or
descending? Try to determine at least approximate sales volumes wherever
possible. And read the product reviews both at the stores and in category-
specific review sites. There are particular challenges posed by the Apple app
store. Their review process and lack of transparency in distribution (how
many people see your app, how many click through, how many download)
make accurate measures of acquisition/engagement difficult to come by.
Summarizing the results and reviewing them with the management team
is helpful, ensuring that everyone is well-versed in the competitive arena the
product is about to enter. Organize the competitive findings themselves into a
competitive grid and a market map
 to help position and market the new
product.
Checklist 17: Capture Market Knowledge,
Traffic/Competitive
Goal:
 Gain understanding of overall market
Reference
: Chapter 4, 
Traffic/Competitive Analysis
Meet with peers in adjacent markets, industry analysts, journalists,
other key influencers
     
  Industry trends
     
  Key unresolved customer needs
     
  Key players
     
  Must-read/Must-ask/Must-meet
     
  Potential competitors/Innovators in the space
  
Research!
     
  Trends
     
  Key players/Influencers
     
  Business models
     
  Key metrics
     
  Traffic measurement, comparison tools
     
  App stores
     
  
Quora.com
  
Construct a Competitive grid
  
Construct a Market map
  
Attend Industry events
     
  Demos
     
  Hands-on time with competitive and adjacent products
     
  Spot talent, trends
Exit criteria
:
  In-depth understanding of the overall market, its trends, players, current
products and vision for growth
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Note to reader: These following guidelines, geared for physical channel
startups, are invaluable to web/mobile startups as well.
Capture Market Knowledge 
(Physical)
With a better customer understanding under your belt, it’s time to round out
your understanding of the overall marketplace. Meet with companies in
adjacent markets, industry analysts, people in the press, and other key
influencers. Go to industry trade shows and conferences to understand the
shape and direction of the market you’re about to create.
When you start a company, you should have some vague notion of what
companies are in adjacent markets or are part of the infrastructure or
ecosystem of your business. Through your own contacts, but usually through
introductions, take peers out to lunch. In exchange, gather information—not
competitive information but answers to questions such as: What are the
industry trends? What are key unresolved customer needs? Who are the key
players in this market? What should I read? Whom should I know? What
should I ask? What customers should I call on?
What will motivate these people to meet? Most won’t do it out of the
goodness of their hearts; rather, they’ll meet to make a “trade.” They’ll learn
about a key problem and its solution in exchange for providing their industry
knowledge and insights.
Just as you did with your problem presentation to potential customers,
don’t present or sell—just listen and learn. Spend the time to take a few of
the friendliest customers to lunch and ask them who they see as potential
competitors, both internally and externally. Who do they think has similar
products? Who else is an innovator in this space? Has this solution been tried
elsewhere in their company? Is anyone else inside their company trying to
build this product? It’s amazing how much you can learn from the people
who will eventually buy your product.
Ask the same questions of peers in adjacent markets, and after practicing
on them, try to make contact with the key industry influencers and
recommenders listed in 
Phase 1
 and ask them the same set of questions.
It’s a rare company that doesn’t have a website. These provide a treasure
trove of information, literally available at one’s fingertips, about competitors,
the market, and the industry where the company plans to compete. Start by
Googling the problem and reading perhaps the first few hundred links. Be as
specific as possible in selection of search terms, and try several different
searches for maximum information. This effort leads to a wealth of market
information, including news about the category, companies providing
solutions, key blogs and websites addressing the industry, industry experts,
and consultants.
Take competitors to lunch.
 
Then dive deeper into each competitor uncovered in the initial search.
Find out not only what they say about themselves but also what others say
about them—positive and negative. Try to discern key product features and
selling points, which help differentiate the new offering from competition.
Collect industry and competitive press releases, studies, and reports, and
follow the thread to the consultants, researchers or pundits who wrote them to
see what else they’ve said.
Next, start gathering quantitative market data. More than likely, Wall
Street analysts issue reports on the market or adjacent markets. Get copies of
all of these reports. More important, actually read them. Understand what the
analysts believe are the trends, the players, business models, and key metrics.
Finally, industry conferences and trade shows are invaluable and
essential. Never say, “I’m too busy to attend.” Attend at least two key
conferences or trade shows (the important ones picked in 
Phase 1
). Not only
do they provide great trinkets, but conferences and trade shows are the prime
areas for both talent-and trend-spotting. Ask usual questions about trends and
players, but this time accomplish a few things that can’t happen anywhere
else. Get demos of competitive and adjacent products. Get your hands on the
products themselves, get competitors’ literature, talk to their salespeople, and
generally immerse yourself in your new industry. Attend as many conference
sessions as possible, listening to others describe their products. What are their
visions of the future, and how do they compare with your own newly
developed value proposition?
After testing the customer problem (or need) and gaining a complete
understanding of the customer, it’s time to expose the product itself to
potential customers for the first time. Not to sell to them but to get their
feedback. Before doing so, be sure to update the hypotheses and business
model wherever changes are indicated.

CHAPTER 5
Customer Discovery, Phase Three: “Get
Out of the Building” and Test the Product
Solution
S
TEVE’S PHONE RANG AND THE VOICE ON THE
 end said, “You don’t know me
but I just read your book and think I need your help.” That was the day we
got to know one of the most innovative startups within a “Fortune 500”
corporation (#6): General Electric’s Energy Storage division.
Prescott Logan, the unit’s brand-new general manager, recognized that
his unit’s new sodium industrial battery was a disruptive innovation, which
GE traditionally does well, but aimed at a market where the end users were
unknowns. Logan realized his division looked more like a multimillion-dollar
startup with all the usual startup uncertainty, but located within a huge,
execution-oriented company. He needed a framework or architecture to help
his team deal with a “white space” 
market and apply startup “search” and
customer discovery principles at a company known for “six sigma”
execution.
Energy Storage was buying capital equipment, breaking ground on a
massive factory, and out making sales calls—in full “execute” mode, the way
most big companies work—based on a ton of diligence and an external
consultant’s 30,000-foot view of the opportunity, but not likely having had
enough face-to-face end user conversations.
Soon after the call, the customer-facing team came to the ranch to map a
customer discovery plan. They had a clear fix on the “customer problem”
(life cycle, wider range of operating temperatures, etc.), and knew how they’d
take the well-vetted innovation from the lab to manufacturing, but one
question remained. Who would buy it in volume, and why? In two days of
brainstorming, the Customer Development process offered GE the following
initial observations:
The new GE battery should serve dozens of market segments, not just
the two they’d selected: backup systems for cell towers and data centers
They needed to look many more customers in the eye to validate the
market selection
Product managers were spending too much time in Schenectady, N.Y.
headquarters, where there were no customers and no answers.
Customers were outside the building
With an existing global customer base, GE had plenty of access to
potential customers
They needed to find earlyvangelists, essential when launching new
technology like GE’s, and determine the earlyvangelists’ characteristics
as well as how to find them
They needed a formal process to review what discovery data they’d
gathered to date to understand how different the value proposition was
for each market segment—and where the opportunities might be greatest
for a high-performance, more expensive alternative to lead-acid
industrial batteries (far bigger versions of the one in your car)
What other business model “boxes” would customers like them to
change in order to sign a purchase order? The GE team uncovered
several including changing the product features themselves, making the
product somewhat configurable, and offering leasing and other
alternative financing models
Prescott grasped Customer Development faster and better than anyone
we had ever seen. The Energy Storage division was a startup. All the rules for
managing and launching product line extensions—business plans and
revenue models—didn’t work. They needed instead to first test their basic
hypotheses about their business model.
Leaving the ranch, Prescott and team joined the million-mile club as
they flew across the U.S. and to Asia, Africa and the Middle East, meeting
face-to-face with dozens of prospects, suspects, and influentials to explore
multiple potential new markets and applications. They did their best to leave
PowerPoint decks behind, and listen to customers’ problems, needs, and
frustrations with the battery status quo. Unscripted, open-ended discussions
with a wide range of prospects were conducted worldwide to listen about
how prospects bought their batteries, how often they used them, and the
operating conditions. In one target market, Prescott actually relocated a top
customer development team member and his family to India and said “don’t
come home til you get a purchase order signed,” which he did, learning
immensely about how his target segment customers might use the battery and
—more important—how they’d evaluate and buy.
Talking to a wide range of prospects, the team soon found more market
segments, and even though they aren’t huge businesses yet, they’re promising
because the product’s unique capabilities “unlock” far more value for users in
certain segments. For example, the battery’s small footprint and
environmental friendliness make it a far better choice as a backup to
computer systems in high-rise office buildings, where real estate is expensive
and the floors often can’t hold the weight of massive lead-acid battery arrays.
In one case, they found an architect who said “I don’t really care what it
costs, I want it.”– the precise definition of an earlyvangelist!
It was customer discovery and early validation on steroids, driven by a
passionate entrepreneurial CEO (though Jeff Immelt has that particular title)
who’d stand up against any valley startup leader. Prescott’s boss, GE VP
Tina 
Donikowski, provided cover while the team executed the thorough,
honest search process any startup must have, rather than the six sigma
execution drills that made GE so famous. And Prescott chose people who
didn’t fit the typical big company mold: “white space” thinkers who lived for
the search and embrace the unknown.
While the jury is still out, and the business is a long way from its huge
revenue goals, this team of passionate entrepreneurs hiding in a 
“Fortune 6”
company have just about posted a “sold out” sign on the factory for its first
six months of operation. We think that sign has a good chance of being up for
a while.
“Test the Solution:” an Overview
The previous phase tested the customer 
problem
 or need and explored
customers’ passion for it, This phase tests whether the 
solution
 to that
problem—the value proposition—gets customers’ enthusiastic enough to
buy/use the product. This phase has five steps:
Update the business model and team—a Pivot or proceed point
Create the product solution presentation (physical channel) or the high
fidelity MVP test (web/mobile)
Test the “product solution” (physical channel) or begin to measure
customer behavior (web/mobile channel)
Yet again, update the business model and team
Identify the first advisory board members
 Web/mobile startups find it hard for customers to visualize the
proposed solution without a minimum viable product. (Most startups should
have at least their low fidelity MVP up by now.) The MVP illustrates the
product for customers so they can see whether the minimally featured product
solves the problem. Feedback takes the form of online and in-person
discussions. (Screen shots and mock-ups are no longer viable stand-ins.)
Update the Business Model and Team 
(a Pivot-or-
Proceed Point)
With a far deeper understanding of customers and their problems, it’s time
for an important pivot-or-proceed pause in the Customer Development
process. While some startups have already pivoted, every entrepreneur should
use this step to take a pause and review the collection of customer feedback
about the problem and its importance. Those findings, coupled with extensive
customer, industry, and competitive research, have taught the company a
great deal about its customers, how they work or play, the market, and the
problem the company has been founded to solve. This learning makes it a
near-certainty that at least some business model hypotheses need to change.
(When a substantial change is made to one or more business model
hypotheses, it’s a pivot.)
Start this phase by gathering as much of the company management as
possible (not just the founders and VPs but directors and managers as well),
along with key investors, for the pivot-or-proceed review. Share everything
that’s been learned, with a focus on customer feedback regarding the
importance or severity of the problem or need—the potential product/market
fit. The group also reviews new findings that may affect hypotheses or
assumptions made in Phase 1, adjusting them where appropriate. These can
often include the value proposition or product specs, customer segments,
pricing, and revenue model assumptions.
Start by Assembling the Data
Before the meeting, the Customer Development team gathers all the customer
data and builds a work-flow map of the prototypical customer. At the meeting
itself, the spokesperson for the team diagrams and describes how customers
actually do their job and whom they interact with. This provides a reality
check of the customer hypotheses. Keep diagramming and drawing until it’s
easy to explain how customers’ businesses and lives work today, including
how they spend their time 
and money. Compare this description with the
initial hypotheses. (While corporate customers may have more formal
organization to diagram, a consumer will have more external influencers to
track.)
With the customer work flow and interactions fully described, dive into
the real news. What problems did customers say they have? How painful are
these problems? Where on the “problem scale” are the customers you
interviewed? How are they solving these problems today? Draw the customer
workflow with and without your product. Is the difference dramatic? Did
customers say they would pay for that difference? In general, what did you
learn about customers’ problems? What were the biggest surprises? What
were the biggest disappointments?
Question 
Everything
Once the Customer Development team has presented its findings, the fun
begins. You can now ask the most difficult question. Given all that’s been
learned from talking to customers, how well do the preliminary product specs
solve their problems? Dead on? Somewhat? Not exactly? If the answer is
“somewhat” or “not exactly,” this meeting becomes a soul-searching,
company-building exercise. Is it because the right people weren’t
interviewed? Failed to talk to enough people? Because nobody asked the
right questions? This assessment is critical because of a fundamental
assumption of the Customer Development model: before changing the
product, keep looking for customer enthusiasm. If and only if no customers
can be found for the product, discuss changing the feature list.
People who talk to customers tend to collect a list of features that, if
added, will get one additional customer to buy. Soon there’s a 10-page
feature list just for selling 10 customers. In contrast, in Customer
Development the goal is to have a single-paragraph feature list that can be
sold to thousands of customers.
What if everyone believes you’re talking to the right customers but the
feedback says you’re building the wrong product? Something has to change.
Don’t continue building the product and think miracles will happen. Either
get back outside the building and find a different set of customers who will
buy the product or consider changing the features.
Assuming the product is at least a partial fit for customers’ problems,
continue examining the product assumptions and specs. Based on customer
feedback, review the Phase 1 feature list. Prioritize the features in terms of
their importance to the customer. Can the Customer Development team
match each feature to a customer problem? If not, why not? While figuring
out what features to ship is important, knowing which features don’t matter is
equally important. Which features did customers not care about? Can any
features on the product spec be deleted or deferred? Remember, in a startup
the Customer Development team isn’t supposed to be adding features; it’s
supposed to be finding out the 
minimum
 feature set, based on input from
visionary customers.
Next, review and get agreement on the delivery schedule, again revising
Phase 1 assumptions as necessary. As noted earlier, visionary customers,
particularly in corporations, will be buying into the entire vision, not just the
MVP. 
They will need to hear what the company plans to deliver over the next
18 months
.
Earlyvangelists need to hear about the 18-month
product roadmap.
 
Finally, as a group, review the other 
Phase 1
 hypotheses. (Now it’s clear
why writing them all down was important.) Given all the feedback from
customers, which of the four market types is the company in? Why is it
different? What are its competitive advantages? Do the initial pricing and
delivery channel assumptions hold up? What was learned about influencers?
 While this step is largely the same for web/mobile startups, they
have the advantage of more behavioral data to assess. Web/mobile startups
can quantify customer interest in and enthusiasm for solving the problem or
filling the need. The analysis shouldn’t care whether 2.5 percent or 3.2
percent of the customers were interested but should instead assess whether
this is a big, serious “hair-on-fire” problem that many customers are eager to
solve. Customer discovery data is limited because online problem discovery
is conducted on a small scale, so right now your analysis is simply directional
in nature. Some signs that the problem or need is sizable or serious:
At least 10 percent (25 percent or 50 percent is even better) of customers
exposed to the problem somehow indicate their interest in solving it
Many of those exposed to the problem pass information along to friends
or coworkers
A 
Net Promoter Score
 of at least +50 or, ideally, far higher
Some clear segment of the total market is particularly passionate about
the problem or need
Pivot or Proceed
Regardless of channel, this step concludes with the first of many pivot-or-
proceed discussions. Management and investors affirm they’re confident
they’re the company has uncovered a problem in which a sizable enough
universe of customers is clearly eager to solve. If not, it’s time to rethink the
value proposition and attack a more severe problem or a need of greater
interest or urgency to a larger customer universe. If the universe is eager to
solve the problem, the group moves on to present its potential product
solution to customers.
...summarizing customer findings is not an
accounting problem.
 
One last thought: Collecting and summarizing customer findings is not
an accounting problem. You aren’t simply adding up the number of
responses. You’re looking for learning, meaning and insight in the data. And
more than anything, you’re looking for hordes of customers who will try to
rip the product right out of your hands so they can have it before their friends
or competitors.
Checklist 18: Update The Business Model And
Team
Goal
: Prepare to assess whether to move ahead or pivot
Reference
: Chapters 3,4, 5, Customer Discovery
  
Assemble the Customer Data
     
  Build a Workflow map of prototypical customer
     
  Customer workflow with and without new product or app
  
Detailed findings from customer interviews
     
  Problems customers have
     
  Pain level
     
  How the problems are being solved
     
  What was learned
     
  Biggest surprises/Biggest disappointments
  
Assessment of data
     
  How well preliminary product specs solve customers’ problem
     
  Product/market fit
     
  Review and prioritize features list
     
  Features matched to customer problem
     
  Customer interest/enthusiasm quantified
  
Review the Phase 1 hypotheses
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
     
  Update the 18-month delivery schedule
  
Pivot-or-proceed discussion
Exit criteria
     
  Determine whether the company has uncovered a problem that many
customers are eager to solve, or if the Value Proposition works
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
High Fidelity MVP Test
 The 
“Low Fidelity MVP Test”
 probed the intensity of customer interest in
the problem or need. Now it’s time to determine whether customers will
engage with or buy the product or use the site or app.
This “solution test” is not a live launch or even a “soft” launch; rather, it
simply invites a limited number of customers to experience the MVP (which
is a continuously improving work in progress). That “limited number” can be
measured in thousands, and if even more show up that’s a very good sign,
since they’ve probably been sent by friends who think highly of the solution.
This “solution test” is not a live launch or even a
“soft” launch.
 
Large-scale testing isn’t the goal here. At this point, you’re opening the
“front door” and inviting a modest number of customers in. It’s discovering
enough passionate, enthusiastic earlyvangelists who clearly believe the
product solves their problem. (Here is guidance on 
home and landing page
MVP
 development.)
More than anything else, watch for the “velocity” of customer
activation. What’s velocity? In a car, it’s how fast it’s moving. In a
web/mobile business, velocity means several things, often at once:
how many visits before someone activates
how many tell their friends
how fast those friends activate, and
how quickly—and how often—visitors return
Two rare exceptions to this quest for velocity may be niche vertical sites
like “lefthandedprobowlers.com” and high-value products like enterprise
software or extravagant jewelry, where fewer high-value customers may be
just fine.
Stealth or No?
It’s impossible to launch a hi-fidelity MVP test in “stealth” mode, since the
product and its website are being exposed to customers and prospects to test
their reactions. Customer Development and stealth are mutually exclusive. If
you believe your idea is so fragile that it cannot be exposed to non-employees
without a signed non-disclosure agreement, you shouldn’t be reading this
book.
A completely open, public site or app invites competitors, so you may
want to consider an “invite-only” site to control access as you test your
solution.
In most markets and industries the trade press is not investigative
journalism (you have to set yourself on fire to get noticed). As a reminder,
now is not the time for press releases, interviews, blogs or public demos
(other than to potential investors). You simply do not know enough yet to say
what business you are in. If you do get noticed by the press, simply don’t
return their e-mails or calls.
Checklist 19: High Fidelity MVP Test
Goal
: Identify a test that gauges the intensity of customers’ enthusiasm for
the product
Reference
: Chapter 5, High Fidelity MVP Test
  
Run the High Fidelity “Solution” test
     
  Invite a limited number of customers
     
  Not a live launch; small scale test – by invitation only
     
  Includes a call to action – “buy now,” “sign up,” “learn more”
  
Measuring Customer response
     
  Number of visits before someone activates
     
  Number of people who tell friends
     
  Speed with which those people activate
     
  Rate of customer return to site
Exit criteria
     
  Simple test for assessing customer interest in the app or site
     
  Tactics for measuring response
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Measure Customer Behavior
 The high-fidelity MVP test launched in the previous step began inviting
customers to engage with your product, site or app. The goal is not to sell
them anything (even though that may happen more than once) but instead to
gauge the extent of their enthusiasm for the product. As customers arrive,
each one of their actions should be measured: where they come from, what
they click on, what they do and how long they stay, to name a few. It’s not a
statistical exercise at all, but a process that begins by knowing the right
metrics to measure.
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an
overview/tutorial. There’s no way you can implement all this or even
process this in one sitting.
 
Measure Enthusiasm Most of All
These metrics are key “enthusiasm indicators” for almost any product, app, or
site:
Purchase:
 Obviously a favorite among e-commerce and subscription sites,
this action is the easiest to measure if the product or service is available for
sale, even as an MVP, at this very early stage. If not, an acceptable substitute
is customers’ willingness to register so they can be notified when the product
is available or simply to learn more about it.
Engagement:
 Once a user visits for the first time, how often does he come
back? Multi-sided market and other ad-supported sites need to know users
will come back often, generating page views that lead to revenue. If a user
comes back five times a day or a week, that’s promising. Five times 
a month
probably won’t deliver a scalable business. If 1,000 customers come once,
how many of them return often, as opposed to those who seldom or never
return? Dig deep to determine the level of user engagement:
how often do users visit?
how long do they stay?
how active are they when using the site or app?
What are the characteristics of frequent returnees (are they gear heads,
teens, retirees or housewives)?
Can more of them be found cost-effectively?
At low-engagement sites like 
Weather.com
 and 
bing.com
, and apps like
tip calculators or Foursquare, customers hit the app or site, find what they
want, and depart in a matter of moments. These sites and apps need to
measure frequency of use to determine enthusiasm. If users visit once a
month, they’re of little value; if they use an app dozens of times a day, it’s
probably a strong multi-sided market product. Low-engagement sites should
measure frequency of use first.
Look for significant visit frequency or time spent on
the site...
 
High-engagement sites like multiplayer games, social networks, and rich
niche-content sites need to look for significant time spent on the site: a solid
percentage of visitors:
registering
filling out profiles, posting
comments
uploading photos
inviting friends to engage
Retention:
 for almost any app or site, retention is a critical measure of
customer enthusiasm. It’s tricky to measure retention during the customer
discovery phase, when time spans are relatively short. After all, if discovery
is under way for two months, retention can be measured for only that brief
period. Look for behavior patterns. Measure both of the most obvious form of
attrition (the opposite or enemy of retention): unsubscribes and terminations.
Inactivity is the most insidious form of attrition, particularly in mobile apps.
People don’t delete the app, but they also never use it.
Referral:
 Do site visitors or MVP users refer their friends?
what percentage refer others?
do they refer one or two or six or 10?
whose referrals engage better than others?
which referrals become heavy users or referrers?
The operators of freecash.com would no doubt get a near-infinite
number of referrals if the site lived up to its name. Greater referral volume
indicates enthusiasm for the product and also should point toward a lower
customer acquisition cost, since many customers may come via referrals from
other customers. Both are good indicators of success potential.
Conduct Pass/Fail Tests
For each test, you should have a pass/fail metric developed earlier. But look
for great or massive response and activity, not just a passing grade.
The answer to pass/fail tests is binary, by definition: Do (more than 50%
of) customers love it? Is the product exciting to “enough” customers (insert
your number here) for the startup to move forward to the customer validation
step?
How many customers are “enough” is a multipart question for
entrepreneurs, not accountants.
Detailed spreadsheets and analyses will help immensely during
customer validation, when the behavior of tens of thousands of visitors will
be measured in painstaking detail. For now, job No. 1 is to be sure the test is
valid, with the success criteria established upfront and factored into the
business model. For example, if you need to spend $50 on Facebook ads to
get an order, that’s great if the product costs $200, but not so good if it sells
for $49.95. So when you “pass” a test, you’re moving closer with each
passing grade to a successful business model.
How many customers are “enough” is a multipart
question for entrepreneurs, not accountants.
 
The question of Earlyvangelist volume needs a convincing answer: yes,
enough interested, passionate earlyvangelists can be found to buy the
product. (They will guide product development and marketing through the
next stages of Customer Development.)
Don’t stop driving people toward the product until you’re certain of:
How many people who expressed serious interest in the need or problem
actually accept an invitation to explore the product, and how many
engage or accept the call to action?
How many less interested or uninterested people are willing to explore
and engage?
For each of those groups, how many will tell others, and how many will
they tell?
Answer each question on both an absolute and a percentage basis. If, for
example, 1,000 people show up, were invitations sent to 2,000 or
200,000? The implications are obvious
Whether via e-mail, AdWords, Twitter or carrier pigeon, each set of
invitations should be sent multiple times (read about 
e-mail cascades
) for
maximum impact. Consider changing the messaging if traffic 
or engagement
are inadequate. Otherwise, nobody will ever know if the messaging was bad
or the product was uninteresting.
Measure Test Results Carefully
It’s crucial to measure customer behavior with the MVP itself. While user
volume will probably be small, measure not only the traffic and user activity
but also the traffic sources and acquisition and activation rates. How much
time did users spend with the product or on the site? Did visitors register on
the first, second, or third visits? Referral rates, perhaps the most critical
measure of enthusiasm, should be closely measured as well. (Guidelines are
found in 
Chapter 3
.)
But look for great responses and activity, not just a
passing grade.
 
Assemble the data and mine it deeply, looking for insights into sources
of traffic, most or least engaged customer types, those who referred the most
customers, and other clues. The data will be reviewed in depth in the next
phase, but focus on one simple thing: have we found enough people
interested in the product to move forward to customer validation?
Study channel data:
 In the web/mobile product arena, channels may be
resellers like 
amazon.com
, an app store or iTunes or aggregator reseller
websites like GameStop, CDW or yugster. Interact with these channels to
understand their regulations governing new products, how long it takes from
initial contact until actual live sales begin on their sites, payment terms and
more. Since they deal with massive volumes of app and software sales, the
execs at these resellers can be extremely helpful on such key issues as pricing
and positioning.
In the customer discovery phase, numbers themselves often aren’t strong
or exciting. Before abandoning ship, dig deeper to determine whether the app
or site has hit a nerve among a customer cohort or segment (teenage girls,
first-time site visitors, old golfers). Mine the data from the most frequent
users (easy if there aren’t too many of them) to see if they share any common
traits. Might they all be Democrats or gourmet cooks or young urban
professionals? If so, consider iterating the marketing messages and the
audience targeting in hopes of getting far more excitement and engagement
from a smaller subset of the total population.
Multi-sided markets should also conduct initial conversations with the
other “side” of their market: the people who will pay to reach the audience
aggregated by the site or application. How do the “payers” buy advertising?
What are they willing to pay? How long does the process take, and at what
point should conversations begin? (Here is a more detailed discussion of the
“other side” of multi-sided markets
.)
Checklist 20: Measure Customer Behavior
Goal
: Determine customer enthusiasm for MVP
Reference
: Chapter 5, Measure Customer Behavior
  
Identify Critical Customer Metrics
     
  Purchase
     
  Engagement
     
  Retention
     
  Referral
     
  Cohorts
  
Mine the Data
     
  Traffic sources
     
  Acquisition, activation rates
     
  Customer engagement (time on site, number of visits before
registration, etc.)
     
  Number of referrals
Exit criteria:
     
  Robust customer interest, excitement — enough to warrant moving
forward
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Update the Business Model Again
(Another Pivot-or-Proceed Point)
Here you’ll update the business model to reflect the latest round of customer
discovery “solution” findings and how they do or don’t affect the elements of
your business model. Think of it as a “tune up,” since you’ll conduct a
thorough business model review in the next phase.
Your focus here is totally about customers’ enthusiasm for the product,
and the conversation should be about pass/fail test results, not opinions.
 For web/mobile startups, data plays an even greater role in this
conversation, as discussed below.
Your business model should undergo regular
updates.
 
Look for Massive Customer Enthusiasm
This is the time to remember that 
lukewarm response to any product or the
problem it solves is a serious, red-alert danger signal
 that calls for an
iteration or a pivot rather than an automatic step forward into customer
validation. Discuss the percentages as well as the number of customers
visited who express rabid or significant enthusiasm for the product and high
confidence that it solves an important business problem or fills a high-priority
consumer need. What’s the team’s honest appraisal of how many customers
would run out and buy it immediately? How many would tell all their friends
or associates? Did any or, better, many declare the best possible vote of
confidence, “I don’t care if it’s not complete or perfect—I want it now”? Start
the conversation by sorting customer reactions into the following main
categories:
     
Category 1:
 Customers unequivocally love the product, and no changes
are needed.
     
Category 2:
 Customers like the product, but we’ve heard consistently that
they want this or that additional feature at launch.
     
Category 3:
 Customers can understand the product after a long
explanation, but no one was jumping over the table to buy it.
     
Category 4:
 Customers don’t see much of a need for the product.
If most of the customers fall into Category 1, congratulations! If the
business model components “add up,” as reviewed in the next step, it may
well be time move on to customer validation.
Regardless of channel, customer discovery sought a market for the
product as originally spec’ed. The most dangerous customer responses lie in
Category 2: “We need more features.” As emphasized earlier, knowing which
features don’t matter is as important as knowing which features to ship first.
Balance customer reactions with development time, since it may take much
more product development effort to earn a convincing Category 1 answer.
Why? Because the joke is true: “Normal people believe if it isn’t broke, it
doesn’t need to be fixed. Engineers believe if it isn’t broke, it doesn’t have
enough features yet.”
The natural instinct of Engineering is to keep adding features. But
customer discovery is a race to get the MVP into paying customers’ hands as
quickly as possible, so fewer features or an MVP that’s just “good enough”
are far better than losing a month or even a week’s worth of customer
feedback. Ask whether any features can be deferred. Let early customers help
determine which features and functionality to add and in what sequence.
Listening carefully to the right customers delivers a product strategy with a
high likelihood of success in any channel.
 In the web/mobile channels, the team is reviewing granular behavior
data from a larger universe of early customers. Qualitative discussions about
features should happen, but almost every discussion is augmented with hard,
cold facts about customer behavior, and data is central to almost every
discussion point. Some of the facts to discuss, always in absolute numbers as
well as percentages:
Page views per day or week and the growth rate of those page views
over time
Average time spent or page views with the site or product
“Rate of gain,” or the time it takes people to increase time/page views on
subsequent visits
Number of repeat visits for avid and average users; time lag between
repeat visits and “rate of gain,” or the measurable decrease in time
between visits
Number and percentage of invited or aware customers who were
acquired
Conversion rates of visitors-to-acquired, acquired-to-activated, and
activated-to-active-users
Referral rates and virality: number and percentage of early users who
refer their friends, how many they refer, and how many friends are
acquired/activated/actively engaged
Lukewarm customer response can indicate a
profound problem.
 
While the numbers are probably small in many of the categories above,
the discovery process is more directional than finite. To be honest, it’s a
search for rampant customer enthusiasm—the kind that delivers blockbuster
business success. Determine whether there’s enough customer enthusiasm
and positive feedback to warrant a move forward to more rigorous testing in
customer validation.
This is where entrepreneurial experience and “gut” guide the go/no-go
decision. And the most convincing arguments for “go” involve statistics that
show lots of activation, many people visiting and coming back again and
again, and many more telling more and more of their friends or colleagues.
So while the statistics drive the conversation, the leaders’ instincts make the
decision. This is where seasoned entrepreneurs, advisers, and investors have
the potential to make important contributions.
Answers in Categories 3 and 4—customers aren’t jumping over the table
or don’t see a need—are typical during a first round of customer discovery.
At a minimum, they require serious thought and probably a pivot that
involves restarting 
Phase 1
 from the beginning rather than continuing forward
on a death march to failure. This makes for a challenging board meeting but
is often a critical turning point for investors and company alike. For
technology products, lukewarm customer response can indicate a profound
problem, usually characterized as the lack of product/market fit: not enough
of a market for the product or a lack of robust demand for a product in a vast
market.
Repackaging the Product—A Pivot Strategy
Other issues are sometimes referred to as positioning but more accurately
described as “product repackaging.” Product repackaging is a problem most
technology startups have to deal with at some point. A technology-driven
startup’s first product is usually determined by the founding product
development team. Often the product development team has a perfect feel for
what the customers’ needs are and how the customers want to buy the
product. But most of the time they don’t. If they haven’t been intimately
connected to the customer, the initial product configuration needs further
refinement by the Customer Development team. While the core technology
might be spot-on, its match for customer needs or purchase preferences can
be off. A single monolithic software package might be too expensive or too
complex to sell that way. Technology repackaging might solve the problem
by reconfiguring the product features. Perhaps it can be sold as modules, or
as a subscription service, or with increasingly featured versions, without
requiring Product Development to completely reengineer the product. This
problem must be caught and dealt with in customer discovery or it may affect
the company’s ability to survive.
Update the Business Model Canvas Again
Regardless of channel, this series of analyses and discussions will almost
certainly affect some of the business model hypotheses. Most likely to be
affected is the value proposition, since this first “solution discovery” effort
helps shed light on whether people think the product solves the problem in a
way that compels them to buy. When it doesn’t, the value proposition is the
most likely suspect for adjustment, whether features are added or subtracted
as a result.
Customer segments should be reviewed, since the product may have
resonated well with some segments and not others. If, for example, the
product generates excitement only among a subset of the intended market
(men, not women; managers, not staff people), that discovery will affect the
revenue stream hypothesis as well. The team will conduct a thorough review
of the business model in the next phase, so this is best thought of as a tune-up
that updates the model to reflect the latest round of customer discovery
“solution” findings.
Checklist 21: Update The Business Model And
Team
Goal
: Prepare to assess whether to move ahead or pivot
Reference
: Chapters 3,4, 5, Customer Discovery
  
Assemble the Customer Data
     
  Build a Workflow map of prototypical customer
     
  Customer workflow with and without new product or app
  
Detailed findings from customer interviews
     
  Problems customers have
     
  Pain level
     
  How the problems are being solved
     
  What was learned
     
  Biggest surprises/Biggest disappointments
  
Assessment of data
     
  How well preliminary product specs solve customers’ problem
     
  Product/market fit
     
  Review and prioritize features list
     
  Features matched to customer problem
     
  Customer interest/enthusiasm quantified
  
Review the Phase 1 hypotheses
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
     
  Update the 18-month delivery schedule
  
Pivot-or-proceed discussion
Exit criteria
     
  Determine whether the company has uncovered a problem that many
customers are eager to solve, or if the Value Proposition works
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Identify First Advisory Board Members
As good as any founding team may be, invaluable people outside the
company who can’t be hired full time will often be willing to help in an
advisory capacity. These advisers can help solve technical problems,
introduce key customers, provide domain-specific knowledge, and share
business expertise and wisdom. Throughout customer discovery, when
meeting customers and analysts, prospecting for advisory board members
should always be in the back of everyone’s minds.
Product Development should engage some advisers for specific help in
designing and building the product, and a business mentor, someone who’s
been through the startup grind before, may also be helpful. One or two
customer voices typically stand out from the crowd. Engage these people by
asking them for advice, taking them to lunch or dinner, and seeing if they’re
interested in helping. Formalize the advisory board process later, during
customer validation.
Read more about the 
advisory board structure and organization
.
Checklist 22: Identify First Advisory Board
Members
Goal
: Begin to identify first advisory board members
Reference
: Chapter 5, Identify First Advisory Board Members
  
Potential advisors approached
     
  Technical problems
     
  Key customer introductions
     
  Domain-specific knowledge
     
  Product development
  
Potential advisors approached
Exit criteria
     
  Initial list of advisory board prospects
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 6
Customer Discovery, Phase Four: Verify
the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
H
AS YOUR CUSTOMER DISCOVERY EFFORT
 turned your hypotheses (or guesses)
into hard facts? Do you believe it’s time to proceed to customer validation,
when you test whether your business model can scale?
There are three critical questions to answer:
1
. 
Have we found a product/market fit?
 Is there sizable demand for solving
the problem, and does the product fill that demand well in the
customers’ eyes?
2
. 
Who are our customers and how do we reach them?
 Do we understand
the demography and archetypes of our key target customers and enough
about their behavior to know how to find them cost-effectively?
3
. 
Can we make money and grow the company
? Can we grow predictably
and large enough to make a great company?
If your answer to this analysis is “proceed,” remember that it’s still not
time to launch. This go/no-go decision answers only one question: do we
have enough 
confidence in customers’ enthusiasm and the product/market fit
to proceed to customer validation and see if our business model scales by five
times, 10 times or more? It’s often frustrating to entrepreneurs who make the
“go” decision, since they’re rarin’ to get out and start doing and selling. After
all, that’s what entrepreneurs do. It’s also a dangerous trap: customer
validation accelerates spending, which—if unsuccessful—can cost you your
job, your equity, or both. (As we’ve said, this process isn’t easy.)
Is This Business Worth Doing?
 (Figure 6.1)
Bring your team and investors to a “full stop” to answer the questions
above. At a bare minimum, whether you Pivot or Proceed is the subject of an
entire board meeting. Generally this assessment forces at least one return trip
back to the start of the discovery process. This is the norm! (It’s far better to
find out now, before more years of 100-hour workweeks are invested.)
 The three questions you’re answering are virtually identical,
regardless of whether the product and channel are physical or web/mobile.
But web/mobile startups should have far more customer feedback and have
implemented more product iterations than their counterparts in the physical
world. Web/mobile startups should already see some measurable “velocity”
in their rates of customer activation (which may not be as clear-cut in
physical channel startups). If your web/mobile startup isn’t seeing strong
early signs of customer activation (sign-ups, referrals, return visits, upsells),
it’s almost certainly time to stop right here and start exploring changes to the
business model.
Have We Found a Product/Market Fit?
Product/market fit has three components:
Is the problem or need that’s addressed urgent or vital to 
lots
 of
customers—i.e., is there a market? (Replace “lots” with a real “pass/fail”
number.)
Does your product solve the problem or fill the need at a price customers
will gladly pay? (Insert real number from business model, of course.)
Are there enough customers (insert number) “out there” to deliver a
sizable (insert number) business opportunity?
This checkpoint is important enough to take these questions one at a
time. (If you’re uncertain or want more data, there’s a deeper exploration of
this set of questions at the end of 
Chapter 11
.)
Are you attacking a serious problem or filling a
compelling need?
This question should have been thoroughly probed directly with customers
both online and, more important, face-to-face. Have you consistently heard
enthusiastic responses like “This is a high-priority problem (or need) near the
top of my list?” If they add comments like “I’d pay anything to solve this
problem” or “My patchwork solution isn’t good enough,” even better. Probe
only for a high level of consistent enthusiasm. That defines a market
opportunity.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Did your customers have friends or colleagues with similar problems or
needs, and did they think the problem was important enough to discuss it
with, or refer it to, their friends or coworkers?
Were many of the customers you met attempting home-grown or
workaround solutions to the problem your product will solve?
Did most customers rate the problem or need’s severity at 8, 9, or 10 on
a scale of 10?
Did most customers rate the pain caused by the problem at or near 5 on a
scale of 5?
Review the before-and-after customer work-flow diagram.
Was the difference dramatic after buying the product?
Were customers palpably excited?
Did customers say they would pay for that difference?
 Web/mobile startups should look closely at customer or user
referrals to gauge the problem’s magnitude and importance. If only tens or
hundreds of users have the problem or need or nobody thinks it’s of interest
to their friends or associates, this is an “acid test” of the problem’s
seriousness. If inquiries from referred potential users yield few or no
activations, it’s equally serious. Stop and get on the phone with as many of
those users (nonusers, really) as possible to understand their lack of interest.
Perhaps it’s the messaging, an easy fix. Don’t “sell” them in the call—probe
for their genuine interest and listen for opportunities to change the message,
the product, or the activation incentives.
Does your product solve the problem or fill the need
for your customers?
Review all the customer feedback report cards, summaries, and analysis—
there should be quite a pile of it. Here again, as with validating the problem
question, be sure there’s robust enthusiasm for the product, even in its MVP
form. Look for comments like “I have to have this now” or “Everyone I know
will want one” or “When can I get it?” Lukewarm or average enthusiasm
seldom delivers scalable startups. Be objective and park entrepreneurial
enthusiasm at the door.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Did the minimum viable product generate significant “buy” or “engage”
enthusiasm?
Was the product exciting enough to stimulate significant customer
referrals? Did those referred customers buy or engage at an encouraging
rate?
Did the long-term product vision generate highly positive customer
feedback?
Is the latest product-features-and-benefits hypothesis still appropriate
and profitable?
Did the long-term product-delivery schedule generate purchase
enthusiasm?
Also review the delivery schedule, revising assumptions as necessary.
Customers are buying into the entire vision, not just the MVP, and need to
hear how and when the product will evolve.
 One of the telltale symptoms of a bad “solution” fit for web/mobile
startups is easy to spot: tons of acquisition but very little activation. Your
potential customers agree that you’ve hit on a problem or a need they care
about, so they came to learn more, but when they arrived, they didn’t like
your proposed solution.
Customer feedback is vital here. First probe customers’ feelings about
the product, site, or app and what they liked or didn’t like about it. Then
probe the messaging. Did the product not deliver on the message (as in “Lose
20 pounds tomorrow”) that got them to the site in the first place? Was it their
lack of confidence in the product, a lack of evidence (claims, testimonials,
diagrams or demos), or poor messaging? Get to the bottom of these questions
before proceeding, gathering as much one-on-one feedback from both
activators and non-activators. What led the activators to sign up? What was
missing in the pitch—the product, the “sales pitch” or the company that
might have changed the minds of non-activators?
Are there Enough Customers to Deliver a Sizable
Business Opportunity?
Did customers verify that they’d buy at the level you expected? Did any
competitive or other data emerge pointing to larger or smaller market share?
Review your initial TAM (total addressable market) and SAM (serviceable
market) hypotheses and compare those estimates with what customers
actually said. How much do they buy, how often, and are their friends or
colleagues similarly inclined? Check findings against market knowledge and
competitive analysis data gathered in Phase 2.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Have you validated the TAM and SAM for your market?
Is the market size as you expected, and is it verified by customer
feedback and industry data?
Is the market growing significantly, with strong growth prospects?
Do customer conversations verify that they’ll buy repeatedly and refer
others to do the same?
Did any unexpected competitive threats emerge?
The hard question to answer here is how many customers are “enough.”
This question must be answered by founders and investors together, with
everyone on the proverbial “same page” about longer-term goals for the
company and whether results to date point toward achieving those results.
These results differ widely by channel and product type. A few
generalizations:
Enterprise software:
 Three or four earlyvangelists showing very strong
interest might well be enough, provided that the team has at least as
many more enthusiastic prospects in the pipeline. Where possible,
customers should come from multiple segments, and few or no segments
should be far behind the others in terms of interest in the product
Capital equipment:
 The “three or four” enterprise software rule applies
here, too, as a rule, but a closer look at results of customer discovery
with a broader range of customers is helpful. Are most prospects
interested in the 
product largely as spec’ed, or does everyone want some
form of customization? Do discovery results point to a robust pipeline,
acknowledging that the sales cycle for capital goods can be quite lengthy
Consumer products:
 Whether it’s a new skateboard or a flat-screen 
TV,
more than a handful of earlyvangelist customers is almost certainly
required—perhaps 20 or 30 or more. It’s also important to establish
serious interest in the channel where you expect to sell the product. If 15
people want to buy your skateboard, that’s probably not convincing
enough for the Walmart buyer, for example
Web/mobile applications:
 Since customer discovery efforts should reach
at least several thousand prospective users or customers, a web/mobile
app should almost certainly activate at least 100 apps or downloads to
say it’s seen “enough” customer response. You should also watch the
percentages, to be sure the conversion rate is encouraging
Social networks and “network effect” startups:
 These should probably
attract at least 500 if not 1,000 active, engaged users to be able say
they’ve attracted “enough.” If the site or app is free or a freemium (free-
to-paid), that number should be at least three times—preferably five
times—larger, since it’s so much easier for a user to say “yes” to
something that’s free. Monitor the activation rate, and look as well at the
percentage of users who are returning regularly—say, three times a
week—since they’re not only an indication of customer volume but also
point to the customers’ quality and engagement
If the team is talking to the right customers but feedback says the
product is wrong, something has to change. Reassess your customer segments
and get back outside to find a different set of customers, or consider changing
the features, product configuration, pricing, or other business model
elements.
Checklist 23: Verify Product/Market Fit
Goal:
 Verify that the company has identified a serious problem, has a
product that will address that problem and that there are enough customers
willing to pay for that product.
Reference
: Chapter 6, Verify Product/Market Fit
  
Assessment: Serious problem or important need?
     
  Number of customers with the problem
     
  How customers rated problem
     
  Whether customers attempted home-grown solutions
     
  Workflow diagram with and without new product
  
Assessment: Does product addresses product or need?
     
  Customer feedback reviewed
     
  Amount of customer enthusiasm for product
     
  Referral rate
     
  Activation/acquisition rates
     
  Review feedback
     
  Review product messaging
  
Assessment: Are there enough customers?
     
  Market size, now and anticipated
     
  Customer feedback
     
  Competitive threats
Exit criteria
:
     
  Verify sizeable demand for solving the problem
     
  Verify that the product fills the demand well in the customers’ eyes
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Do We Know Who Our Customers Are and How to
Reach Them?
The previous step assures that there are customers “out there” who want your
product. But do you know how to find them and sell to them with an
affordable marketing or “get customers” budget? This verification step starts
by ensuring that you know “what a customer looks like.”
Can you draw a customer archetype for each of your key customer
segments? Does it clearly point you to places where you can find them?
Can you draw a day in the life of a customer so you know how to pitch
the product to him?
Did some segments respond better, faster, or with larger orders than
others?
Did any new segments emerge, or should any be eliminated?
Do customers recognize big improvements in a “day in the life” of
users?
Do you know what your customers read, trade shows they attend, gurus
they follow, and where they turn for new product information?
Can you draw your channel map, showing how the product moves from
your startup to its end user, along with the costs and marketing/sales
roles of each step in the sales channel?
Try to measure your “get customers” cost and response rates objectively.
Review the real, “all in” costs (including staff time, overhead, whatever) of
activating or selling, say, 50 customers. When you add up all the costs (not
just the ad or AdWords costs themselves, for example), are you still confident
of your ability to get lots more customers at roughly the same cost per
customer?
Look beyond your total “Get” budget to identify which programs were
most cost-effective, and do some homework to be sure that if, for example,
you quintupled your e-mail marketing budget, results would quintuple as
well. This is the time 
to figure out how much you really need to spend to get
one (or 50) good customer(s), since you’re about to head to customer
validation, where spending will increase by a factor of 10 if not more!
If a significant amount of customer feedback has given you high
confidence in all these answers, there’s one more step—determining whether
you can consistently acquire customers at the costs outlined in your “Get”
hypotheses. Your early tests of the Get programs should have given you a
good sense of that, so review the data collected. Don’t worry if the costs are a
little high, since you’ll be optimizing those programs as you ramp them up
during validation.
 Web/mobile startups should be far smarter about answers to these
vital “Get” questions, partly because they can be. Is the response best on
Facebook, Twitter or Foursquare? Do people who eventually activate find the
site or app most frequently via AdWords, textlinks, natural search or when
they read about it on blogs or hear about it from friends? You should know
this quite well based on even the earliest customer discovery testing you’ve
done.
Remember to look beyond mere customer acquisition statistics and
identify the activated users or buyers by 
source
 so that you know where to
find lots more of them. Often you’ll discover that nothing works better than
person-to-person referrals, so look at that “Get” approach more closely. And
always look at the data for each customer segment or cohort separately, since
some customers will usually prove far easier to acquire than others.
Be sure to update the business model based on any changes in customer
acquisition costs discovered in this review, since they’re often the largest
costs your startup will confront.
Checklist 24: Verify Who Customers Are and How
to Reach Them
Goal
: Verify that company knows its customers and how to reach them
Reference
: Chapter 6, Verify Who Customers Are
     
  Customer archetypes
     
  Day in a Life of a Customer
     
  Customer responses assessed
     
  Customer behaviors, influencers assessed
     
  Channel map
     
  Costs assessed for each step of moving product
     
  Updated business model reflecting changes in customer acquisition
costs
Exit criteria
:
     
  Detailed understanding of who the customers are, how to reach them
and what it costs to get them
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Can We Make Money and Grow the Company?
Assemble Revenue Model Data
By this point, the team has assembled a massive amount of hard data about
pricing, revenue, costs and acquisition and marketing costs, among others.
The data needs to be verified, with any gaps filled in along the way, which
may entail returning to learn more in further customer, channel, or product
development discussions. The most important hard data to review includes:
summary of customer report cards, indicating potential sales revenue
expectations over time
market size estimates
channel cost and revenue potential summaries
pricing plan
customer acquisition costs
detailed information about the industry, the customers, and their
behavior
competitive product and pricing information
Combine this data to create an accurate net revenue forecast for at least
the next four quarters of the company’s existence—the customer validation
phase—and, if possible, another year beyond that. This shouldn’t be a
precise, to-the-penny estimate by any means. Instead, it’s more of a rough
“gut check” to be sure that the company will emerge from customer
validation as a growing, profitable business. Take a close look at 
Figure 6.2
, a
hypothetical analysis of a company selling both via its own website and
through a physical channel. Average cost of customer acquisition is 40% of
revenue in this example. The data assembly is a four-part process:
1
. 
Compute the “best estimate” of total gross revenue the company will
receive 
directly
 from customers, quarter by quarter. Review results of
customer discovery report cards and “get customers” program tests as
well as market 
size estimates to estimate the company’s direct revenue
from customers quarter by quarter.
2
. 
Next, compute the amount of 
channel
 revenue (other than direct revenue
for sales to end users, from which the company receives 100 percent).
Review the channel costs (margin, rep fees, promotional costs, etc.) and
deduct them from channel revenues.
3
. 
Add the net channel revenue to the total direct revenue by quarter to
figure total company revenue. Deduct quarterly operating costs from the
revenue.
4
. 
Compute all the costs of acquiring customers, recognizing that they will
most certainly change quarter by quarter, both as the company spends
more money on its “get customers” effort and as it acquires customers
more cost-effectively.
Sample Financial Analysis
 (Figure 6.2)
The computation should deliver a reasonable rough estimate of the
company’s revenue expectations across its next four (or, preferably, eight)
quarters. Consider developing this entire exercise three different ways, using
a “good/better/ best” approach that delivers three different forecasts or
business cases: high, best guess, and worst case.
This analysis all by itself may stop the pivot-or-proceed process in its
tracks, as it often does, if the computation shows the company running out of
money within the year. The spreadsheet is a simple example of a rough “cash
burn” 
computation that should be enough to send any smart founder back
through the discovery and validation processes, considering that the company
runs out of money 90 days from moving forward.
Looking at an analysis like this, the founders and investors should be
highly nervous about proceeding to spend nearly $2 million on customer
creation activities. The startup in this example has several options:
Raise another few hundred thousand dollars immediately in order just to
survive the year ahead
Reduce the spending on operations or customer acquisition costs
Cut staff or reduce founder salaries until break-even is achieved
Without taking any of these steps, the company will clearly not survive,
and it must return to refine its business model.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Have you translated market and market share findings into potential unit
sales and revenue?
Have you validated your pricing model with customers?
Are volume, demand, and purchase-frequency hypotheses validated?
Were any unanticipated channel costs uncovered, such as sales reps’
salaries or promotional fees?
If the market is multi-sided, have all costs of generating “buy”-side
revenue been estimated?
Does this rough forecast point to a scalable, profitable business with
substantial exit value?
Checklist 25: Verify Can We Make Money
Goal:
 Determine whether the company can be profitable
Reference
: Chapter 6, Customer Discovery, Verify Business Model/Pivot or
Proceed
  
Revenue Model Data
     
  Summary of customer report cards, indicating potential sales revenue
over time
     
  Market size estimates
     
  Detailed information about the industry, customers, their behavior
     
  Competitive product and pricing information
     
  Channel cost and revenue potential summaries
     
  Pricing plan
     
  Customer acquisition costs
  
Accurate net revenue forecast for the next 4-8 quarters done three
ways (good/better/best)
     
  Direct revenue
     
  Net channel revenue
     
  Total revenue
     
  Acquisition costs
     
  Basic operating costs
     
  Cash burn
     
  Cash at quarter end, by quarter
Exit criteria
:
     
  Reasonable rough estimate of the company’s revenue expectations
across next four-eight quarters
     
  Update your business model canvas
Pivot or Proceed?
This is either the beginning of the end or, more likely, just the end of the
beginning. It’s where you must acknowledge that an estimated one idea in
thousands morphs into a scalable, profitable big company with an exit value
of $100 million or more. The company has put a stake in the ground with a
series of hypotheses and tested its assumptions. Potential customers have
validated the product, and a base of prospects has evolved. And all the
learning is captured in writing in the updated business model canvas and its
supporting hypothesis documents. Now it’s time to honestly assess if the
modified hypotheses provide a sound foundation for moving forward—not to
launch—to a larger-scale test in customer validation.
Summary questions to review and discuss:
Have we identified a problem lots of customers will eagerly pay to have
solved?
Does our product solve these needs distinctively, cost-effectively and
profitably?
If so, do we have a sizable market and a viable, scalable and profitable
business model?
Can we draw a day in the life of our customer before and after purchase
of our product?
Can we create an organizational chart of users, buyers and channels?
The hardest question is simple and needs an honest answer: do the
customer discovery findings point to a big enough market that’s hungry for
the product? This is often a painful question and, sadly, more often than not
leads back almost to the beginning of customer discovery. While it’s a defeat
of sorts, it’s far better to confront this question honestly and candidly,
ensuring that the business model, 
properly executed, points to a repeatable,
scalable, profitable business opportunity. Without one, the company faces a
painful road to ignominy.
Exhausting as the customer discovery process is, it often requires
multiple iterations to fully understand the market and discover customers
who can’t wait to buy. However, it’s never been easy to find the Holy Grail.
Until you do, take everything learned in Phases 1 through 3 to heart, modify
the presentations, go back to 
Phase 1
 and do it again. Try out several markets
and users. Does the team need to reconfigure or repackage the product
offering? If so, modify the product presentations and go back to 
Phase 3
(solution presentation) and do it again.
If the team votes “all systems go,” there are two more steps to complete
before taking a deep breath and moving forward into customer validation.
Determine the Validation Checkpoints
It’s wonderful to have lots of soft, fuzzy metrics of success, but they seldom
deliver success to startups. Be sure that every hypothesis has a clear,
measurable “validation checkpoint” and that those checkpoints tie into the
business model. A few examples of the kinds of checkpoints to test in the
customer validation phase:
Physical channel/business-to-business checkpoint examples:
We can close a sale in three meetings
One of six prospects will buy if we get to talk to VPs of finance
Customers will expand the number of users of our service by 25 percent
after six months
Customers will place an average of two orders per month
Web/mobile checkpoint examples:
Every new customer invites 10 friends, half of whom sign up
A third of our visitors will return to the site within a week
A quarter of our visitors will refer an average of 1.5 friends within a
week
Average session duration will be 10 pages or minutes per visit
Average order size will be $50 in the customer’s first month
One hundred websites will promote traffic to our site at a CPM of less
than $X
One hundred websites will run our banners on a CPA basis
On to Customer Validation? Congratulations!
If you’ve gotten this far, you’ve changed your hypotheses many times. Some
were iterations, others were pivots. One of the best techniques to see how far
you’ve come is to show the canvases as a series of snapshots over time. You
can do this by putting them up on the wall or clicking through a series of
PowerPoint slides. Either way, this visual presentation of the hypotheses and
your tests to turn those guesses into hard, cold facts, is the final step in
determining whether it’s time to move on to the next of the four steps,
customer validation.
If it’s time to move to the next step, congratulations! This is a major
achievement and warrants celebration. Customer discovery is the most
challenging, powerful step you’ll encounter in Customer Development:
defining a product, an offer, a channel and pricing for a product that
consumers are eager to buy. Hold on to all the information collected from
customer interviews for use throughout the phases of customer validation,
when actual selling will develop a sales roadmap for the company.
Customer discovery is an exhausting, sometimes-frustrating process.
However, it’s the foundation of Customer Development and thus the
foundation of a successful, scalable business. The checklists found
throughout this book recap the phases of this step, the goals of each phase,
and the deliverables proving that the goals have been met. With that done,
take a well-earned vacation or a long weekend to celebrate. You’ll need to
rest up before moving on to customer validation.
Checklist 26: Verify Business Model – Pivot or
Proceed
Goal:
 Assess whether the modified hypotheses provide a solid foundation for
moving forward to larger-scale testing in Customer Validation
Reference
: Chapter 6, Customer Discovery, Verify Business Model/Pivot or
Proceed
  
Modified hypotheses assessed
     
  Problem/need identified
     
  Product solves product/need
     
  Sizeable market
     
  Viable, scalable, profitable business model
     
  Day in the Life of the Customer, with and without product
     
  Organizational chart of users, buyers and channels
  
Clear, measurable Validation Checkpoints identified
Exit criteria
: Full, honest assessment of Customer Discovery effort:
     
  Is there a big enough market that’s hungry for the product?
III
Step Two:
Customer Validation
Chapter 7:
Introduction to Customer Validation
Chapter 8:
Customer Validation, Phase One:
“Get Ready to Sell”
Chapter 9:
Customer Validation, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building and Sell!”
Chapter 10:
Customer Validation, Phase Three:
Develop Product and Company Positioning
Chapter 11:
Customer Validation, Phase Four:
The Toughest Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
Overview of the Customer Validation Process


CHAPTER 7
Introduction to Customer Validation
Along the journey we commonly forget its goal.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
E
.PIPHANY’S
 
FOUNDING HYPOTHESES WERE
 typically pretty straightforward
and “investable” in the mid-1990s, when software companies were
automating everything from accounts payable to network security, sales force
processes and even wine-cellar inventories. “Why not automate the marketing
department?” asked the founders, meeting in their modest living room. “After
all, most of the tasks like press releases and data sheets and customer letters
are repeatable processes.” Venture capital was raised and the company began
to build its product based on the founders’ vision.
However, the company’s initial idea of who the customer was and the
problem they wanted to solve was just plain wrong. The company’s later
success was due to the four passionate entrepreneurs’ willingness to listen to
customers and to the three painful pivots driven by customer feedback.
The Browser Breakthrough
During the ’90s, large corporations acquired different software applications to
automate each part of their enterprise—finance, customer support,
manufacturing, and sales among them. But the data these applications
collected were accessed via reporting tools from the IT organization. More
important, the data existed in “virtual silos,” with each functional system
walled off from the other. The finance system didn’t talk to the sales system,
which didn’t know that the manufacturing system even existed. Queries like
“Compare the sales data of green dresses versus blue ones with current
inventory for each by store, and contrast the gross margin by region to
calculate discounts” were virtually impossible to answer to because they
required combining data from three incompatible applications. As a result, it
could often take days or even weeks to get a simple inventory-detail report.
E.piphany’s then-radical notion was to provide managers
anytime/anywhere drill-downs and analysis in real time, without IT, through
a revolutionary new technology called a web browser. One of the company’s
key hypotheses was that the product should be a great fit for companies with
lots of customers, tons of data on each one, and a recurring need for fast new
data-driven, microsegmented marketing campaigns.
An Epiphany at E.piphany
Early on, E.piphany assembled an advisory board. A key adviser was the VP
of database marketing at Schwab. She was incredibly generous with her time
and said the system might work in their application. She introduced the
company to five other database marketing executives, who essentially said,
“If you get a system working at Schwab, we’ll have to buy one as well.” You
couldn’t get much better than that. E.piphany had found its first
earlyvangelist and first market.
But each time Schwab’s people looked at the system’s technical details,
they politely said our product was missing a key feature for database
marketing. It took two meetings before the founders realized they understood
her problem, all right, but the solution—the underlying database schema of
the software—was missing the most important feature for solving it. It didn’t
include “householding,” and without this feature, she could never buy the
E.piphany system. (Householding, well-known among database marketers,
recognizes that two or more people at the same physical address live together
and, in Schwab’s case, often invest together. This feature was crucial to
direct-marketers who didn’t want to send multiple or differing ads to the
same address.) And no amount of sales and marketing hand-waving was
going to fix the problem.
It was a major mistake. Until this meeting, the founders hadn’t
understood the customer problem well enough to provide the correct solution.
E.piphany’s co-founders, Ben Wegbreit and Steve Blank, joined the
Schwab VP, and her engineering team in a deep technical discussion of what
the software needed to do for Schwab’s business and what was needed. Ben
asked five or 10 questions, everybody nodded and the meeting ended. On the
long ride back to E.piphany’s living-room office, Steve asked, “Ben, how do
we solve Schwab’s problem?”
After a moment of silence, he replied, “Show them page 6 of our
product spec.”
“What do you mean page 6? Our spec only has five pages!”
Ben looked at Steve and smiled. “Not anymore.”
They had just pivoted the product and refined the minimum feature set.
E.piphany’s first order from Schwab came the week after they demo’ed
householding. Other orders followed soon after. A week later, the founders
sat down to figure out what other feature they would toss out to make room
for this one.
E.piphany would go through two additional equally painful pivots
before its initial public offering, but that “householding” pivot sold the
founders on the “power of the pivot” value.
The meeting and car ride from Schwab to the company headquarters
illustrates the customer validation process every startup needs: a method for
validating the business model with real customers and orders.
Customer validation turns hypotheses into facts about basic questions
like:
     •   Do we understand the sales/user acquisition process?
          
   Is it repeatable?
          
   Can we prove it’s repeatable? (If our business model is single-sided
commerce, the only acceptable proof is enough full-price orders.)
          
   Can we get these orders/users with the current product?
     •   Have we tested sales and distribution channels?
     •   Are we confident we can scale orders/users into a profitable business?
     •   Have we correctly positioned the product and the company?
The Customer Validation Philosophy
Customer validation attempts to “test sell” at every stage. It runs a continuing
series of quantitative pass/fail tests to 
determine whether there’s strong
enough product/market fit to justify scaling sales and marketing spending.
Most of your testing effort will be asking people to give you an order or
engage with your app or website. At this point, you’re testing the entire
business model, not its individual components, even as you learn more details
about some, like price or channel.
Just as customer discovery was disorienting for experienced marketers,
the customer validation process turns the world upside down for experienced
salespeople and, in particular, those with sales responsibility. All the rules
sales executives learned while selling in physical channels at large companies
are 
not
 applicable to startups. In fact, they’re positively detrimental. It’s not
all about the launch party!
In the customer validation step, 
you are not going to hire and staff a
sales team.
 You are not going to execute to a sales plan or “the sales
strategy.” The reality is 
that you don’t know enough yet to do any of these
things. At the end of customer discovery, you have in hand firm hypotheses
about who will buy, why they will buy, and at what price they will buy. But
until those hypotheses are validated—with customer orders—they’re all little
more than educated guesses, even with the work invested to develop them.
From Business Model Canvas to the Sales Roadmap
In customer discovery you tested some of the hypotheses of your business
model:
Value proposition:
 You affirmed it with a few dozen to a few hundred
people
Customer segments:
 You have a hypothesis about customer archetypes
Customer relationships:
 You tested several “get, keep and grow”
activities
Channel:
 You understand your key channel partners, and some have
expressed interest
Revenue model:
 The company has an idea of how to price its offering
A sales roadmap uses all you’ve learned from customer discovery to
guide the creation of a sales funnel specifically for your company. It answers:
Who influences a sale? Who recommends a sale?
Who is the decision-maker? Who is the economic buyer? The saboteur?
Where is the budget for purchasing the type of product you’re selling?
How many sales calls are needed to make one sale?
How long does an average sale take from beginning to end?
What is the selling strategy? Is this a solution sale?
If so, what are “key customer problems?”
What’s the profile of optimal visionary buyers, the earlyvangelists every
startup needs?
Where will the traffic come from? Will it stick?
Will the product be strong enough to grow virally?
Unless a company has proven answers to these questions, few sales will
happen, and those that do occur will result from heroic single-shot efforts. Of
course, on some level, most sales VPs realize they lack the knowledge they
need to draw a detailed sales roadmap, but most believe they and their newly
hired sales team can acquire this information while simultaneously selling
and closing orders. This is because most executives new to startups confuse
searching for a business model with the execution of a known business model.
A sales roadmap is part of the 
search
 for a business model. Only after it’s
built can it be executed. Startups can’t learn and discover while they’re busy
executing. As we can see from the rubble of any number of failed startups,
attempting to execute before you have a sales roadmap in place is pure folly.
Building a Sales Roadmap Versus Building a Sales
Force
Given how critical the validation step is, a CEO’s first instinct is to speed up
the process by spending more on customer acquisition or adding salespeople.
The reality is, this doesn’t speed up the validation phase. In fact, it most often
slows it down. Instead, you’ll build a roadmap to figure out how to get
repeatable sales (by explicitly testing product/ market fit). Once that’s done,
then
 build a sales organization.
Developing a sales roadmap is part of the search for
a business model.
 
In an existing market, customer validation may simply validate that the
sales VP’s rolodex or contact list is relevant, and that product performance
metrics the company identified in customer discovery were correct. In a re-
segmented, clone or new market, even a rolodex of infinite size (or tripling
the AdWords budget) won’t substitute for a proven business model and a
tested sales roadmap.
For an experienced sales or business development executive, these
statements about customer validation are heretical. All the actions in
Customer Development we consider to be mistakes are what traditional sales
professionals have been 
trained to do. It seems counterintuitive and
disorienting. So let’s look more closely at why the first sales in a startup are
so different from later-stage sales or selling in a large company.
Founders Must Lead the Customer Validation
Team
Founders who complete customer discovery often mistakenly ease up and
delegate customer validation activities to Sales, Business Development,
Marketing or Product Management. This is a bad idea. Middle and junior
managers aren’t likely to be good at customer validation, which requires
creative searching, probing, and turning on a dime—not execution of a
repeatable process.
Why must the founders lead? First, founders and only founders call the
shots on pivoting. To do so, they must hear about flaws in the product or
business model 
directly from the customers.
 Nothing else has the same
impact. Anyone other than a founder who learns of a serious product or
business-plan flaw faces two challenges: he or she doesn’t have the authority
to pivot, and he or she seldom has the courage to report bad customer
feedback to the founder.
 In web/mobile channels, where there’s much more feedback to
process, the founders still make the call about pivots, but the company needs
to have data junkies, A/B testers, statisticians, and SEO/PPC experts, as well
as at least one or two wildly creative online marketers. (This might be
physically embodied in the founder and one or two amazing people.) This
team will measure, assess, manage and improve the acquisition, or 
Get
Customers, funnel
. As they’re getting “out of the building” digitally, a
customer development team also leaves physically for face-to-face customer
validation, and for deal-making that drives traffic or referrals.
Validation Proceeds at Different Speeds in Different
Channels
It takes far more time to set up visits in a physical channel with prospects in
cellphone companies in Asia and Africa than to get customer feedback
electronically for a website. And more customers can be reached via
web/mobile channels than can ever be met face-to-face.
 Customer validation for web/mobile startups always proceeds faster
with many more iterations than it does with physical channels and goods.
Why? It’s all bits that can be changed. Regardless of speed, the fundamental
principles of customer validation are identical across all channels.
Make Early Sales to 
Earlyvangelists
In customer validation you will target Earlyvangelists as your first paying
customers. (If you can’t sell to them, it doesn’t get better over time.)
Constrain Spending in Customer Validation
A typical failure scenario for startups is 
premature scaling
, when there are
more salespeople in the field burning cash than are needed while your
business model is still unproven. Or running expensive demand-creation
activities before you’re sure who your customers really are. Too often those
sales people are fired and their marketing programs killed when the startup
faces a major pivot after scaling too early. Customer validation delays sales-
and-marketing hiring and spending until validation is nearly complete. This
constraint is central to the process, which assumes startups will fail and
iterate often. The spending constraint keeps enough cash in the bank to fund
multiple pivots on the road to success.
Prioritize What Needs to be Validated
Prioritizing the business model elements that need validating is essential at
the start of customer validation. Every startup business model has a zillion
moving parts. Validation can’t possibly measure and affirm every variable or
the founders will be 100 years old by the time they’re ready to scale—or,
worse, exit—the business.
The business model canvas is an excellent guide here. Most startups will
focus on the four core elements: value proposition, customer relationships,
channel, and revenue model. This list works for many businesses but not all.
Multi-sided markets need to prioritize all sides of the market. Think about the
five or fewer things that will make this a huge, successful business—or not.
Why Accountants Don’t Run Startups
With all the process steps involved, it’s sometimes hard to remember that the
Customer Development process isn’t a giant focus group. The goal is not to
add up all the customer feedback and vote on what features to implement.
Founders who are artists at heart run startups—the true purpose of Customer
Development is to 
inform their vision.
 (In a new market, there’s no data at
all!) A great entrepreneur may consider all the customer data, listen to his
instincts and say, “Here’s why I’m going to ignore what we just heard.”
 And Finally: Don’t Be Afraid to Let Go When
Lightning Strikes
Occasionally, fast-scaling web/mobile startups with viral or network-effect
drivers find the business suddenly blasting off, even if this book doesn’t
suggest that it should happen yet. This occurred at Google, YouTube,
Facebook, and Twitter, to name an elite few. If you’re lucky enough to hit a
consumer nerve as hard as they did, put this book down and hold on to the
rocket ship. After all, that’s what entrepreneurs do! (Skim the book another
time on your private jet or yacht or Sunfish.)
The Customer Validation Philosophy, in Summary
Customer discovery first tested your hypotheses about the company’s
business model with a relatively tiny group of customers who were asked for
opinions, not orders. Discovery itself didn’t deliver any proven, hard facts
about who would buy or how scalable the business was.
Customer validation goes to the next step and 
determines whether a
product/market fit can be validated by orders or usage.
 It does so by further
developing the MVP as well as the company’s sales and marketing plans and
materials. Then it gets founders out of the building (physically, virtually, or
both) to test the MVP and every other key business model hypotheses,
including product features, pricing, channel, and positioning. How? By
asking for orders (or downloads, logons, or clicks)!
Test the MVP. How? By asking for orders.
 
Customer validation is complete when the company has answers to these
three questions:
1
. 
Can the business scale?
 Will a dollar spent on customer acquisition
yield more than a dollar’s worth of incremental revenue, page views,
downloads or clicks?
2
. 
Is there a repeatable and scalable sales roadmap?
 Does the company
know the right prospects to call on or acquire, and what to say to them to
consistently deliver sales?
3
. 
Is the sales funnel predictable?
 Do the same sales programs and tactics
consistently deliver an adequate, profitable flow of customers through
the funnel?
Now let’s get started.
Overview of the Customer Validation Process
Customer Validation: Overview of the Process
 (Figure 7.1)
Customer Validation has Four Phases
Phase 1
 consists of six “get ready to sell” activities; product positioning,
sales/ marketing materials for “test selling” efforts, the hiring of a sales
closer, the creation of a distribution channel plan, refining a sales roadmap,
and creating an advisory board. These activities make your team the best
prepared early stage venture ever to hit the streets.
 Companies in web/mobile channels also have six “get ready to sell”
activities: Product Positioning, assembling Acquire/Activate Plans, building
the high-fidelity MVP, building the metrics toolset, hiring a “data chief” and
creating an advisory board. They help deliver lean, cost-effective customer
acquisition programs.
Phase 2
 gets founders out of the building to put the product to the ultimate
test: will customers validate your business model by buying your product?
You’ll attempt to actually sell customers an unfinished and unproven product
without a professional sales organization. Getting feedback is as important as
getting orders. Startups in the physical channel do this with brochures,
PowerPoints, sales materials and, where possible, product demos or mockups.
Dozens if not hundreds of meetings help refine the product presentation and
channel plans, validate the sales roadmap, prove the predictability of the sales
funnel, and validate that the business model is repeatable, scalable and
profitable in a real-world test.
 Web/mobile startups “go live” and get out of the building virtually to
see if their plans and tools to acquire customers actually attract customers
who activate or buy. Do more than a handful of real customers behave as the
hypotheses suggest they will? Acquisition and activation activities are
measured and optimized.
Startups in multi-sided markets (physical or web/mobile) need to get out
of the building to test each side of the market. Web/Mobile marketers first
test users and then validate a different set of hypotheses (value proposition,
segment, revenue model, etc.) with the “payers,” who are marketers or
advertisers willing to pay to reach people using the site for free.
Phase 3
 happens once you have a couple of orders under your belt and
enough customer information to develop and refine your product and
company positioning. The positioning is tested in meetings with industry
pundits and analysts and face-to-face with the expanded customer audience.
 Web/mobile startups refine their “Get” program tactics. Then they
conduct initial product positioning, next they gather and organize the
customer behavior data collected in 
Phase 2
: customer responses to “Get”
activities and metrics summarizing their initial on-site behavior. They collect
feedback about the MVP itself and the effectiveness of acquisition tools.
Phase 4
 stops all activity for long enough to conduct a detailed pivot-or-
proceed analysis and verify that, regardless of channel, customer validation is
complete and the company knows how to scale. If so, it’s ready to reap the
rewards for founders and investors alike. But first there are lots of tough
questions and hard work to verify.
In sum, the question is simple: “is this a business worth doing,” and
devoting several years of backbreaking work? Will it generate enough
revenue, growth and profits to achieve the founders’ and investors’ goals?
And has the team learned enough to make it happen?
Odds are overwhelming that the optimum business model won’t be
found on the first or second try in validation.
The moment customer validation is over is when it’s clear that there are
real orders, users, or clicks—not surveys or chats. Customer validation
confirms that customers will accept the minimum viable product, proves that
the customers exist, figures out how to reach them predictably, and crafts a
scalable plan to engage and sell many more. It’s often called the “epiphany
moment.”

CHAPTER 8
Customer Validation, Phase One: “Get
Ready to Sell”
P
HASE
 1 
OF CUSTOMER VALIDATION PREPARES
 the tools to test the company’s
ability to acquire customers. In this phase, you’ll craft your product
positioning, which guides how you write the marketing, and online materials
needed for the sales effort. For companies in the physical channel, other steps
in this phase include development of collateral materials, channel sales plans,
and a sales roadmap. Sometimes, a “sales closer” is also hired at this point.
And you’ll finalize your advisory board.
 Web/mobile channel startups develop their plans and tools for
customer acquisition and activation as well as a dashboard or toolset for
monitoring the results. They create a hi-fidelity MVP to be sure the
acquisition efforts are valid.
Steps in this first phase are markedly different for each channel, so
physical and web/mobile channels are addressed separately, as outlined in
Figure 8.1
.
When all these steps are in place, it’s time to get out of the building and
start selling, in 
Phase 2
. Here are the steps each channel requires before you
are ready to sell.
Phase 1 – Get Ready to Sell
 (Figure 8.1)
Get Ready to Sell: Craft Positioning Statement
From your customer’s perspective, what does your company stand for, what
does your product do, and why should they care? You probably had an idea
when you started the company, but now you have some real experience in
interacting with customers. It’s time to revisit the product vision, features and
competitive information in light of what you’ve learned in customer
discovery.
Can you reduce all that you’ve learned into a single clear, compelling
message explaining why your company is different and the product is worth
buying (or spending time with). That’s the goal of a unique selling
proposition. A unique selling proposition builds the bond between you and
your customer, focuses marketing programs, and becomes the focal point for
building the company. More relevant for this step, it gets the company’s story
down to a short “elevator pitch” powerful enough to raise a customer’s heart
rate. It’ll appear in lots of different places from billboards to banners and
business cards from here on out and helps focus sales and marketing efforts.
Don’t worry about getting it perfect, because it will change with feedback
from customers, analysts, and investors. For now, take a first best shot.
While positioning messaging seems straightforward, it can be a
challenge to execute. It takes serious work to get to a pithy statement that’s
both understandable and compelling. It’s much easier to write (or think) long
than to write (or think) short. Start by revisiting what customers said they
valued during customer discovery. What were the top problems? Did a phrase
keep coming up to describe the problem or solution? Where does the product
affect customers most? How significant is the product’s impact? What does
the new offering provide that competitors can’t or won’t? What does it do
better? Think simple and short at all times. This may be a place where outside
creative resources are worth the investment.
In technology startups, one of the biggest challenges for engineers is to
realize the need for a simple message that grabs customers’ hearts and
wallets, not their heads and calculators. It’s not about the product features.
Seek a simple sentence that condenses the entire value proposition into a few
pithy, catchy words that say it all: “Think Different,” from Apple; “Don’t
Leave Home Without It,” American Express; “Just Do It,” Nike; “We Try
Harder,” Avis; “Earth’s First Soft Drink,” Perrier; “The Ultimate Driving
Machine,” BMW.
The exercises, in 
Figures 8.2
 and 
8.3
, developed by Geoffrey Moore (of
Crossing the Chasm
 fame) early in his career as a marketing consultant, can
help evoke the necessary elements:
Product Positioning Statement
 (Figure 8.2)
Here’s how a mobile expense-reporting application, 
Mobiledough,
 might
have used the product position statement:
Product Positioning Statement Example
 (Figure 8.3)
What might Mobiledough’s tag line be? A few candidates:
“Your dough, on the go. Fast, accurate, online”
“Track your expenses while you’re makin’ tracks”
“Mobiledough. It just adds up, instantly, online”
Use the Geoff Moore outline or one like it to brainstorm positioning
statements with the Customer Development team. Consider a companywide
contest or creative session. To see if the positioning is emotionally
compelling, think about the following:
Do customers’ heart rates go up after they hear it?
Do they lean forward to hear more? Or do you get a blank stare?
Is it understandable in the users’ language or unique in their minds?
For B-to-B products, does the positioning imply a cost or competitive
advantage for the product?
For consumer products, does it save time or money or provide fun or
love, glamour or status?
Finally, does the positioning pass the reality test? Claims like “lose 30
pounds in a week” or “increase sales 200 percent” or “fall in love tonight”
strain credibility and probably legality as well. Moreover, it’s not only the
claim that needs to pass this test. Is your company a credible supplier for the
product you’re describing? When selling to corporate customers, there are
additional hurdles to think about. Are your capabilities congruent with your
claims?
One last thing to keep in mind is our continual question about what
market type
 you’re in. If you’re offering a product in an existing market, your
unique selling proposition is about better, faster, or higher performance. It’s
framed by what you’ve learned from countless customer interviews about the
basis of competition..
If you’re creating a new market or trying to reframe an existing one,
you’ll probably come up with a transformational unique selling proposition.
Transformational unique selling propositions deal with how the solution will
create a new level or class of activity—i.e., something people could never do
before.
Checklist 27: Craft Company Positioning
Goal
: Create a clear, compelling message explaining why 
your company
 is
different and the product is worth buying
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: “Get Ready to Sell”
  
Message statement
     
  Condenses Value Proposition into single phrase or sentence
     
  Emotionally compelling
     
  Credible
     
  Takes Market Type into account
Exit criteria
:
     
  A short, pithy message that explains what the company stands for, what
the product does and why customers should buy from it, trust it, and
care
Get Ready to Sell: Acquire/Activate Customers
Plan
 In customer discovery, you developed a rough plan to 
acquire and
activate customers
. Now it’s time to refine those plans and build the
acquisition and activation programs and tools. As a reminder:
Acquisition
 is where prospects first learn about, experience, or visit the
product, site or app. This is the widest point in the company’s sales
funnel and the customer’s first interaction with the company
Activation
 gets newly acquired customers to sign up, participate or buy,
or at the very least to identify themselves and move through the “Get”
funnel
Remember that “Get” activity is very different in web/mobile: you must
attract customers to your site, app, or product or they won’t even know you
exist! Review 
this section
, which, in brief, says: figure out where your
customers go when they’re searching for a solution; be visible and inviting in
as many of those places as possible; and “earn” their visit to your product
with helpful, friendly information, not hard-boiled sales pitches.
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an overview.
There’s no way you can implement all this or even process it in one
sitting. It’s a plan. Implementation happens later.
 
“Get Customers” Tools for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 8.1)
The “Acquire” Plan and Tools
The Acquire plan is short, to-the-point, and tactical in nature. The plan helps
you find tools that predictably deliver large numbers of “good” customers
(who engage with or spend heavily on the site or app) into the widest point of
the funnel (at the left) at the lowest cost per customer.
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 8.4)
 
WARNING:
 There is no possible way you can read, process and act on
this section in one read. There’s a lot here. Skim it first, then go back
and read each section. Then think about what action you need to take for
your startup.
 
The Acquire plan (see 
sample plan
) should fit on a single page. It details
the first set of Acquire activities to test and includes:
Who:
 Who’s responsible for driving the program; who will add support
or expertise
What:
 Describe the tactic and its parts (see below for a list of tools)
Budget:
 Estimate of spending for the first round of testing
Timing:
 Outline the steps needed to launch (our example in 
Figure 8.5
uses a four-week cycle)
Why:
 Specific, measurable acquisition goals of each plan element
Multi-sided or not:
 Do you have users, or users and payers?
The acquire plan and tactics will change repeatedly, since in customer
validation they’re basically a series of experiments.
The acquire plan and tactics will change
repeatedly... they’re basically a series of
experiments.
 
In a physical consumer channel like Walmart, marketers seldom know
which consumers see, touch, or buy any particular product. But in the
web/mobile channels, every aspect of consumer behavior can be
instrumented, analyzed and, often as not, optimized to improve business
performance. Be sure your product is instrumented to track every consumer
action or inaction. Without building the instrumentation upfront, optimizing
your acquisition activities is more challenging, if not downright impossible.
A Sample Acquire Spreadsheet
Shown in 
Figure 8.5
 is a sample of part of an Acquire plan for a web startup
with a small budget. The plan is built around a few key assumptions:
     
Who:
 Two staffers are needed, one full-time and one half-time
     
What:
 The tactics, chosen by the team, seem best-suited to maximizing
leads and sales (see next section for a list of tools)
     
Budget:
 The startup has about $25,000 to spend for this
A Sample Acquire Plan and Timetable
 (Figure 8.5)
     
Timing:
 The team is allowing itself four weeks to prepare all elements for
the launch of validation
     
Why:
 The goal is to get 30,000 to 35,000 customers to download a free
trial and to get 15 percent of them to convert to paying customers. This
would achieve a customer acquisition cost of about $5, as suggested in
this plan’s revenue model hypothesis
     
Multi-sided or not?:
 Does your product have both users and payers? If so,
a multi-sided market requires a separate plan for each “side” of its
market. Users will be acquired one way, while reaching and selling
advertisers will demand a totally different approach. (Our sample is a
single-sided market)
Guidelines for Developing the Acquire Plan
Determining whom to acquire (i.e., which customers,) what promotional
tactics to use, and what to say and how to say it (the content and messaging)
is made easy because you did most of the research and planning in customer
discovery. Start this plan by referring back to three hypothesis documents
you devised when you created and tested your original business model canvas
hypotheses:
Customer segments:
 customers to be reached (which guides e-mail,
targeting of marketing activities, ads, and PR)
Customer relationships:
 how customers will be reached (SEO, PPC, e-
mail, PR, etc.)
Value proposition:
 what will excite customers and persuade them to
engage, visit or buy
Don’t be afraid to update or change the hypotheses based on the latest
feedback or even instinct at this point, since they’re still just “best guesses”
confirmed by only a few customers. Other guidelines to keep in mind:
Remember that this is a test
 to figure out which tools work and cost-
effectively when they’re launched during customer creation, the next
step. 
This is not a company or product launch.
 Your goal is learning, 
not
revenue,
 so don’t be afraid to test lots of alternatives
Define success upfront
 for each test, using a pass/fail metric (such as
“one in five people will click”), and monitor results
Be the greatest, friendliest, coolest thing going.
 Your job is to attract or
invite customers to your product, site, or app, so be interesting and
welcoming (and, if appropriate, even fun or funny) rather than not just
offering a hard, cold sale. Think like your customers, and be prominent
and visible where you think they’ll be searching for a solution like
yours. (Think about forums and online communities)
Running tests without collecting data is a cardinal
sin.
 
Instrument everything.
 Running tests without collecting data is a
cardinal sin. Engineering needs to spend the extra effort to collect all
customer behavior data so it can be measured and optimized
continuously. Confront this upfront, as it’s hard to “bolt on” later
Don’t start everything at once,
 since that will create chaos both in the
market and in the company. For example, start search engine
optimization and pay-per-click tests on Day Five, and add e-mail and
affiliate marketing programs two or three weeks later. The individual,
program-by-program results will be easier to identify and measure
Don’t spend more than $2,000 or, if well-funded, $10,000 to test any
one thing.
 The startup usually can’t afford it at this stage, and the risks
of guessing wrong are too great
When a test seems to be working, ramp it up
 to be sure it withstands the
test of scale. If a $2,000 e-mail marketing campaign is performing,
double it, refine it and do it again
Choose agency partners very carefully, if at all.
 The costs and
management time needed to hire a pr, ad, or web agency this early in
your startup make it a very risky proposition. Most often, agencies are
great at execution of programs but not at developing and testing
strategies. Rely on founders and staff where possible, as they know the
product and the business model best. Consider freelance talent
specialized in developing tests and strategies or those who specialize in
specific tasks (e.g., pay-per-click, demos and other specialized skills) if
they don’t exist within the company
Don’t launch the Acquire effort by itself.
 Activation programs must be
ready to “catch” the customers you’ve acquired, so if there’s copy
saying, “Sign up today and get a free box of chocolates,” for example,
the site’s back-end system has to be operating, the chocolates have to be
ready to ship, and copy for the thank-you e-mail must be ready to go. If
you’re taking customers’ money, all back-end systems need to be
working, including such elements as receipts, credit-card processing,
and customer service. Similarly, site and app instrumentation must be up
and running, tested and feeding the management dashboard so it can
measure the behavior of every customer who passes through the funnel.
Remember that acquisition by itself is one of several integrated pieces of
the “Get” strategy (there’s also activation, retention, and “grow
customers,” to name a few).
The acquisition plan is managed through close monitoring of every step
customers take as they move through the sales or “get customers” funnel.
That monitoring, generally in a 
dashboard
, enables constant effort to improve
performance or “throughput”—customers movement from one step to the
next—at every step of the funnel, using tools detailed in the next section,
“optimizing the acquire plan.”
Acquire Plan Tools
Acquisition tools you can buy
The list of customer acquisition tools you can buy and use is virtually
endless, but their customer impact and effectiveness vary over time.
Acquisition is a numbers game based on your ability to cost-effectively
deliver large volumes of customers to your site or app. Basic tools include:
search-engine marketing
e-mail marketing
outreach to bloggers
affiliate marketing
online lead generation
customer incentives
Use the web (and 
www.steveblank.com
) to identify the latest
innovations and to select vendors. Most tools are discussed in detail in
Customer Relationships
.
 
WARNING:
 There is no possible way you can read, process and act on
this section in one read. There’s a lot here. Skim it first, then go back
and read each section. Then think about what action you need to take for
your startup.
 
Acquisition Tools You Engineer Into Your Product
In addition to the tools you buy and deploy, build social network and viral
components into your product itself to create the most powerful acquisition
tool of all. First, it’s fundamentally free, making it obviously the most cost-
effective! Second, it can be remarkably fast, as seen in the skyrocketing
growth of social-media and photo-sharing sites, among others. As a bonus,
it’s highly likely that the first customers attracted to the new product will
know others who are also interested and will personally endorse and refer the
product, app, or site to them.
Three distinct types of social networks and network effects aid acquisition:
     
Word of mouth,
 the most prevalent, encourages happy customers to share
news of their new-found product or service with friends and business
associates. It brings a personal friend-to-friend endorsement that’s
extremely powerful
     
Sharing
 allows others to use and share articles, demos, and sample code so
people can re-Tweet and use it on social media, RSS feeds, etc.
     
Direct network effects:
 People who want to share photos, make free calls,
or have free video chats with friends need their friends to use the service,
so they invite them to join
A great test of how your product fits is asking your early customers, “On
a scale of 1 to 10 (with 10 being the best), would you recommend this
product to your friends?” If your product doesn’t rank 9 or 10, it has little
word of mouth or network effect.
Some products are inherently 
viral
...
 
Some products are inherently 
viral,
 some aren’t. Some can be
engineered to do so. For example, every sent Gmail message ends with the
tag line, “Invite (recipient) to Gmail.” It uses the e-mail “send” process to
expand the network and Gmail’s user base.
Encourage early customers or visitors to promote the product and your
company to friends and business colleagues at every opportunity. Give them
materials (e-mails, mailable links or demos), and consider rewarding them for
doing so, as many online marketers do. This tactic is highly cost-effective
and credible when done right, in large measure because it brings with it the
sender’s implied endorsement.
Develop simple widgets or links that make it easy for early visitors or
customers to “like” the product, company or both on Facebook or to Tweet
about it. Create YouTube videos and other shareable content that encourages
exploration of the product. People respond to their friends’ likes and dislikes
and are more apt to explore something recommended by a friend than
something they see in an e-mail or an ad. Create robust profiles of company,
product and users wherever possible on Facebook and other relevant social-
networking sites. Provide valuable information of interest to prospective
customers rather than purely self-serving messages.
You might also want to consider creating separate, unbranded
experiences (sites, blogs) that are specifically geared toward the problem
your product or service is intended to solve. For example, a game startup
might create a site dedicated to “cheats” hints and tips. A medical-device
company selling gastric bands might have a site dedicated to weight loss.
The Activation Plan and Tools
While the previous step, acquisition, brings prospects to the doorstep (your
home page/landing page,) activation gets them to engaged with a sign-up, a
free or paid download, a click on something, game play, or a post on a site.
However you engage the user, activation is the critical choke point in the
sales funnel, where the customer begins a relationship with the product or
company as a member, user, subscriber, player, or buyer. Whether you’re
asking for sharing, playing, participation or an order, this is the place where a
first-time visitor crosses the threshold to become an active user of your site or
app.
The “Get Customers” Activation Activities in Web/Mobile Channels
(Figure 8.6)
In the activation step, users decide—all by themselves—whether to
engage with or buy your product, and the decision is often made in a matter
of seconds. So the home or landing page must work hard and fast to activate
newly acquired “lookers,” converting them into buyers, users, or tryers.
(Activation sometimes happens in an app store, via e-mail, through the
channel, or by telephone.) If you can’t get people to activate at once, ideally
you can get them to at least sign up so they can perhaps be persuaded to try,
engage, or buy later.

The landing page is where activation most often begins.
 (Figure 8.7)
Wherever the customer arrives, he or she typically knows little if
anything about where he or she has just landed. Here’s what you need to
address to activate a customer, using an oversimplified example of what goes
through the visitor’s mind on arrival:
Why
 am I here? They want me to buy this new online multiplayer game
What
 makes it special? Oh, here’s a feature list and reasons to buy
How
 do I know it’s any good? Here’s a demo, list of endorsements, user
quotes, etc.
Where
 do I get more information? I see buttons pointing to free trials,
more info, etc.
Next?
 What does the company want me to do? Oh, click here to try/
buy/sign up
Guidelines for Developing the “Activate” Plan
In the customer validation phase, the activation plan is really a test plan, A/B-
testing every key aspect of the home/landing page, from color and copy to
offers and navigation. It’s OK to start with approximations or guesses, but
they should iterate rapidly based on measured customer responses.
Should a landing-page offer scream “free” or subtly ask for a credit
card? Should the “buy now” button be elegant and on top or bright orange
and huge in the lower right-hand corner? Does an animated product demo
activate more users than a simple graphic? There are scores if not hundreds of
variables on almost any home page, and many tests must be repeated more
than once to confirm results. Outside information architects and design
professionals can help. They understand the range of tools available as well
as the latest tricks of the trade in this highly creative process.
The list of tools, tricks, and variables to try is nearly endless, and it’s
hard to predict which ones will win. That’s why repeated testing and
measurement are so important, following the “test, measure, tweak” approach
discussed earlier.
Here’s what an activation plan should include:
Two types of action steps:
 Activation happens both on and off the home
page, so create two separate lists of the “Get” customers activities you
plan to test (like offering a premium with every signup)
First/second test:
 This is customer discovery, where you’re running
small-scale tests of your activation programs. Each of those programs
needs to be tested at least twice, if not far more frequently, as you try to
find the program that’ll generate the most users or customers. Identify at
least the first two tests
Pass/fail test:
 Every test should have a “pass/fail,” or an expectation that
defines what “success” will look like if you have it. Based on
experience, trials, or research, identify the metric that’ll determine if the
experiment was a success
An “Activate” Plan Example
Most activation happens on the home or landing page, where you’re doing
anything you can to get a user or customer you’ve acquired (he or she came
to your page) and trying to engage them—get them to click, sign up, post a
comment, play, or buy.
The home page is “where the action is” for
activation.
 
And while the home page is “where the action is” for activation, there
are other things you can also do—like send follow-up e-mails, for example—
to further engage someone who’s expressed more than a passing interest.
Table 8.2
 is a simplified example of what an activation plan might look
like for a social network where new golfers can offer and solicit improvement
tips. In this example, since the business is in a multi-sided market, activation
goals include such non-monetary actions as registration, inviting friends,
asking a question or answering one.
Sample Activation Plan for a Golfers’ Social Network
 (Table 8.2)
Tools for the Activate plan
Activation happens both on and off the home page. Key tools to consider for
each are in the bullet points that follow.
On the home or landing page
The landing page itself offers lots of ways to drive activations, including
content, look and feel, and navigation. It can also showcase these activation
tools:
product demos
free trials
customer contact tools
animation
Non-home page acquisition tools
While the home page is the primary activation tool, consider these others too:
e-mail cascades
price/incentives
traditional tools
On the home or landing page itself:
Start with Content, Look and Feel, Functionality
and Navigation
Good landing pages bear little resemblance to online brochures. They’re
invitations to “activate now,” working hard to invite customers to engage or
interact with—or buy—the product. This must happen literally at once, often
in seconds. Otherwise the customer (and the money spent to acquire him or
her in the previous step) vanishes with the click of a mouse. Develop the
home/landing page along four axes:
1
. 
Content:
 Does the site present everything for a customer needs to make
the “activation” decision simply, in multiple places (for example, does
every page say “join now”)? Is it friendly, informative, and inviting?
2
. 
Look and feel:
 Does the appearance relate to the audience (“corporate”
for business apps, “serious” for financial sites, “edgy” for 
teen or
skateboarding products)? Does it match the typical style of the
demographic or their country?
3
. 
Functionality:
 What tools, widgets, configurators, demos or other
devices can quickly engage customers, get them experimenting with and
experiencing the product itself, and figuring out what it costs, how much
time it would save, or how the game plays?
4
. 
Navigation/structure:
 How is information organized? How accessible is
it? How easy is it for users to complete high-value tasks (ordering,
searching, etc.)?
Here’s how to approach each area.
Home/Landing Page Content:
     •   
Tell me how I got here!
 Users arrive at the home/landing page in a
variety of ways (clicks, e-mails, referrals), but don’t assume they
know where they’ve landed. Welcome them; explain the site
(“Welcome to the No. 1 online gaming portal.”) to avoid fast
abandonment
     •   
Reinforce the “scent” of
 the e-mail, ad, or tool that drove the customer
to the page. Use similar verbiage (and look and feel) to increase
confidence that the viewer has come to the right place
     •   
Issue a clear call to action.
 The “pitch,” or call to action, tells the
customer what you want him or her to do. It should reflect 
positioning
developed in Stage 1 of validation, whether it’s “buy now,” “sign up,”
or “attend a seminar.” Use redundant calls to action wherever you
can, but be sure they’re not confusing. Clearly tell visitors what to do
and why doing so delivers value to 
them.
 The landing page should
always accomplish the following:
          
   Explain what problem the product solves and why it’s important to
users and worthy of their attention
          
   Communicate ease of use and installation for the product
          
   Clearly explain how the product works
          
   Provide fast proof that it works (user quotes, competitive analysis,
demos, etc.)
Calls to action
 appear three ways on a home/landing page: hyperlinks,
buttons, and forms. They should stand out and be obvious to every visitor.
Highlight product features that make the most powerful pitch for activation or
purchase, and always provide easy access to more information about all the
above.
Some guidelines for home or landing page content development:
Encourage me to “experience the offer:” Never
 think of the landing
page as a brochure. It’s effective only if it encourages customer
engagement, trial, or purchase. All content should invite involvement,
and offers should be judiciously sprinkled throughout headlines,
graphics and text, including “try now” textlinks embedded at least
occasionally in body copy
Offer multiple calls to action
 ranging from “buy now” and “learn more”
to “download our white paper” and “talk to someone.” Remember to
make one of these far more prominent than all the others—the action
most desired by the company
Write short!
 Web visitors are very fragile, temporary guests. Respect
their short attention spans and get to the point before they depart. The
best calls to action are generally written in 10 or fewer words and
displayed in an easily readable font
Be specific.
 One of the most powerful page elements should be the core
product-positioning statement developed in Step 1 of customer
validation. Succinctly tell users why they should buy or use what the
company’s selling
Use bold graphics
 such as snipes or bursts on the landing page to
promote a mobile site.
Deploy contests, promos and sweepstakes
 to encourage mobile
downloads. These are highly valuable in the online space—both for
users, who can redeem such offers immediately, and for startups, which
can test and adjust offers on the fly
Manage your content inventory.
 Content should build credibility for the
company, presenting it as solid, established, and ready to do business.
Information on most of the following should be accessible from the landing
page:
product detail and information about the solution
customer lists and success stories
customer resources and support
vendor partners
company background
current news and events
company contact information (postal, phone, and e-mail)
the company’s privacy policy
Look and Feel
Design the home or landing page for maximum impact and minimal
confusion. Always provide the user with multiple pathways to the desired
“activation” action, whether it’s subscribing, posting, playing or buying.
Strive for fewer, crisper design elements, not more, keeping national cultural
differences in mind when designing. (The advice below is for the U.S., where
users expect websites to look clean and simple.) In some other countries,
including China, users expect more design elements, which may look
cluttered to a Western eye.
Keep it clean and simple,
 without too many distractions from the call to
action
Pick one promotional message and drive it the hardest
 at the expense of
others. Make it more prominent, supported by other things on the page,
and compelling, along the lines of “free trial download” or “special
introductory pricing this month”
Leave plenty of white space.
 Crowded pages are clearly a turnoff. An
overbearing number of graphic elements (art, type, buttons, etc.) will
frustrate and distract users
Use visuals.
 Whether using graphics, videos, demos, or diagrams, don’t
rely on copy itself to maintain user interest. Web visitors have extremely
short attention spans. Keep the diagrams, charts and graphics simple.
Use animation carefully to add interest
Use interactivity.
 The web allows customer interaction with the brand,
something no other medium allows. (If these kinds of tools aren’t on the
site, you’re not using the web to its fullest potential)
Use big buttons.
 “Download” or “buy now” or “sign up” should be
graphically interesting, sizable and easy to spot
Navigation and Functionality
Navigation is really about two things: the logical organization of information
and the shortest routes to task completion.
“Friendly” navigation provides users several “routes” to the call to
action. Routes might take a user to a demo, to customer testimonials, to a
white paper, or to a list of product features. Since nobody can predict what a
customer wants to do next, each pathway should easily lead to “buy now” or
another call to action.
Confusing navigation is the “foe,” offering too many choices, confusing
buttons, textlinks and a hodgepodge of options a user might choose. This
often leads to higher abandon rates.
Overall Website Functionality:
     •   
Use tools to invite customer engagement.
 Video, animation, demos,
configurators and other devices should provide customers multiple
ways to engage with the product itself, any way they’d like. “Take a
tour (of our product)” and “play now” and “forecast your retirement
needs” are typical engagement invitations, and each is far more
powerful than offers like “read more” or “learn about...” Some
examples:
          1. “Enter your age/answer three questions to learn how little this
insurance costs”
          2. “Click here to see Facebook friends’ photos on our site”
          3. “Pick your character and start talking to him now”
          4. “Find young single women in your neighborhood right now”
          5. “What’s your favorite golf ball? Click here for deep discounts. Free
shipping!”
     •   
Use a demo
 to engage users with the product and show off its features
and ease of use. Make the demo more compelling (and under a minute
long) than a PowerPoint. When possible, draw users into an actual,
functioning component of the product (“put your data here” or “play
this brief version.”). The demo should end at the call to action
Engage users with the product and show off its
features.
 
     •   
Offer free trials.
 Not to be confused with a 
freemium
 pricing strategy, a
free trial offer can be restricted by limiting the free version’s
functionality or duration (as in “try it free for two weeks”). Follow up
with a series of e-mails that introduce features, offer tips, and provide
reasons to buy. Where it makes sense financially, follow up with
telesales
     •   
Click to contact.
 Particularly for commerce and paid subscription sites
(and probably too costly for freemium or multi-sided startups), offer
several ways for prospects to contact the company. This can be as
simple as a clickable link that spawns an e-mail to the sales
department or a form for requesting more information or a call from
Sales. Many commerce sites use real-time live voice and chat
technology to engage quickly with prospects and enhance the chances
of activation
     •   
Use animation.
 Interactive configurators, calculators, animated demos,
microsites, and many other utilities can bring the product to life and
engage the customer. These can be developed inexpensively by
outside sources found online. Some websites launch brief welcome
videos or quiet, animated demos that load automatically when a user
gets to the site, but only play on demand (so it doesn’t annoy the
visitor or drive her away). Use animation sparingly, as it can be
jarring
     •   
Incorporate source-driven pages:
 Create multiple landing pages and
match each one to the source of the click that brought users to the
page. “Welcome, Yahoo friends” would almost certainly increase the
visitor’s comfort and click-through rate, as would a “special offer for
Yahoo e-mail customers” that, oddly enough, is the same offer
presented to Gmail customers or on a slightly different landing page
An entire industry has emerged around tools to
encourage customers to take action.

 
An entire industry has emerged around tools to encourage customers to
take action while at a company’s website. New home-page tools are
developed regularly, and some grow in popularity while others fade. This is
an area where a modest amount of time spent on online research about the
latest tools can pay off. In addition, freelance or small-agency experts in
activation tests might be helpful (just remember that you don’t want to run
major programs yet, just experiments). Check 
www.steveblank.com
 for the
latest tools.
Beyond the Home Page itself, Consider these
Additional Activation Tools:
E-mail cascades:
 E-mail addresses are difficult to acquire, since customers
resist registering, knowing that sales e-mails will follow. Think of customers’
e-mail addresses as valuable assets: prospects willing to be sold. Develop
sequences of three e-mails that strike a balance between brevity and
enthusiasm for the product and its features, and stress key elements of the
value proposition. Each e-mail should highlight different features or other
reasons 
to buy and, where possible, tailor the message to reflect the source of
the sign-up (referring site, location on website). Every e-mail should have
multiple calls to action, both in textlinks and via a visible graphic “action”
button, along with offers of further information and, of course, an easy way
to unsubscribe. Compare the tradeoffs of HTML and text e-mails, since many
mail servers block HTML e-mail.
Price/incentives:
 As discussed in detail in the section on 
revenue model
hypotheses
 in Chapter 3, pricing can be another activation tool: free,
freemium, special offers, and volume discounts can all be used. To avoid
cannibalization of the company’s revenues, consider making the special
discount offer as a follow-up, after the prospect has declined the full-price
offer at least once.
Traditional tools:
 Don’t overlook a wide range of traditional, non-digital
marketing tools when it comes to activating customers. Contests are often
used (“win 500 frequent flyer miles” or “get a free tote bag,” for example), as
are sweepstakes (“you could win a free trip”). Outbound telemarketing can be
a powerful tool to active folks who register. Direct mail can sometimes be
used cost-effectively, as can traditional media advertising, where you can
consider using QR codes.
Whatever the tool, test it during customer validation and measure the
result as well as the resulting cost per activation. Compare the costs of
acquiring active users with traditional vs. online tools and consistently
optimize for the lowest cost per active user. If your test seems to work in a
controlled test, expand the test and try again to see if the program scales.
Much more on this in 
Phase 2
.
Managing the Activate Plan
Close management of activation tests step is vital. In the next step,
optimization, we’ll discuss the use of dashboards to measure performance
and cost-efficiency of each activation program individually. However, as a
first step, a simple “funnel” can be used to monitor activation. Here’s an
example:
Example of a Simple Activation Funnel
 (Figure 8.8)
This funnel monitors prospects as they move through each step of the
activation process. In this example, only one website visitor in 10 (10
percent) signs up for the free trial. Worse, only 9 percent of that group
actually activates, becoming users of the product. And only a very small
subset of that group moves on to become active users of the product or
service. In this simple example, the company will need to attract literally
millions of “free trial” sign-ups in order to build a sizable number of active
users—a daunting challenge indeed.
Checklist 28: Get Ready To Sell —
Acquire/Activate Customers
Goal
: Devise plans for getting customers to the app or site to sign up or buy
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
  
Acquire plan and tools
     
  Who is responsible for driving the program
     
  Tactic
     
  Budget
     
  Timing
     
  Acquisition goals
     
  Multisided or not
     
  Social, network and viral components
     
  4 weeks’ worth of initial activities to test
  
Activation plan and tools
     
  On landing page
     
  How customer arrived at site
     
  Reinforce language/tone of invitation
     
  Issue multiple clear calls to action
     
  Explain what problem the product solves
     
  Off landing page tactics to test
     
  A/B tests
Exit criteria
:
     
  Initial “acquire” and “activate” plans for the first four weeks
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Get Ready to Sell: Build a High Fidelity MVP
 Customer discovery used your two MVPs to rapidly test and iterate
prototypes to learn about the problem/need and solution. The goal of the
MVP in customer discovery wasn’t sales, just customer feedback.
This step tests the high fidelity minimum viable product. It’s a more
featured complete and polished functional version of the one used in 
Phase 3
of customer discovery.
 It still does not offer all the features and functionality
the ultimate product vision will deliver. Why hi-fidelity? As customer
validation invites more users to the product to test acquisition and activation
tactics, the hi-fidelity MVP improves the test results, since visitors don’t feel
as if they’re looking at a second-class product even if the MVP is an
incomplete rendering of the product, as is often the case.
What does “part” of a product look like? It might be a multiplayer game
with five levels of play instead of the 20 or 50 that will eventually be
included. A social network could have limited features that don’t allow photo
sharing or provide users’ locations but facilitates easy interaction and
navigation. An online shoe store might have only women’s casual shoes as a
start, or it might not offer odd sizes while providing a superb e-commerce
experience. If features aren’t live for the customer validation tests, consider a
page or several highlighting features that are “coming soon,” but don’t make
it too prominent, since the objective is to test-sell the MVP now, not to give
customers a reason to wait.
Note that a hi-fidelity MVP doesn’t just magically appear in this step.
You don’t just stop at this step and write one. Instead, it’s the result of agile
development with continuous deployment and continuous product and feature
refinements that have been made since the company opened for business (one
of the many reasons you can’t do Customer Development 
with waterfall
engineering). You haven’t gotten this far unless your product development
team has continually iterated, deployed, tested and improved the high fidelity
MVP since you left 
Phase 3 of customer discovery
.
Now if not earlier, the hi-fidelity MVP must be architected for
instrumentation that delivers a stream of customer and product behavior data
used at the company every single day to further develop the business model
and the product. Ensure that the dials, meters and gauges are working, and
then hold onto your seat because we’re about to move those needles. Think of
instrumentation for a software application as gauges and instruments on the
business model canvas, providing information about what’s happening in the
application.
Checklist 29: Create a High Fidelity MVP
Goal:
 Develop a polished, functional MVP
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
     
  Refined, more “complete” or polished version of the low-fidelity MVP
used in Customer Discover to elicit customer feedback
     
  Part of the product – incomplete but polished rendering of product
vision
     
  Limited features, but not second-class
     
  Invites more users to the product to test the acquisition and activation
tactics
     
  Architected to deliver customer and product behavior data
Exit criteria
:
     
  A High Fidelity MVP, which will be used to generate a steady stream
of customer and product behavior data to refine the business model
and product
Get Ready to Sell: Build a Metrics Toolset
 Web/mobile businesses focus on data collection, analysis and
optimization from the day they go live till the day the doors close. A
web/mobile startup’s conversion funnel monitors customers through their
entire life cycle. The entire process is driven by a never-ending campaign to
test, measure, and optimize every step in the funnel, from awareness to
purchase. It’s a 24/7 process of “try it, measure it, tweak it.”
Web/mobile businesses focus on data collection,
analysis and optimization from the day they go live
til the day the doors close.
 
The products you build should be instrumented to measure every click
on the website or app, its source, and the action it causes or doesn’t. As a
result, the management team should have at its fingertips a dashboard that
summarizes every key, actionable user behavior, and delivers insights and
trends that drive continual business improvement. There are two parts to
building a metrics tool set:
determining which key business metrics need to be measured
developing a dashboard or system to collect and monitor the data
Key Metrics to Measure
Long before the web was born, 19th-century retailer John Wanamaker of
Philadelphia summarized the challenge that online and mobile marketers
would face nearly two centuries later: “I know I’m wasting half of my
advertising budget. I only wish I knew which half.” In the web/mobile
channels, this process is far easier than it was for Wanamaker’s newspaper
and radio ads, because every click and consumer action can be recorded.
Determining what to measure is where the process begins.
Using your customer relationships hypotheses, identify the metrics for
success in the business model. Prioritize and limit the number of metrics to
fewer than a dozen, and the only metrics to be measured are those that can be
acted on or improved. Think: “how many, how fast, how much, and how
good?”
How many
 customers are acquired, and how many of those are
activated? (And how many are lost? And where in the purchase process
do you lose them?)
How fast
 do they arrive and how fast do they activate? After one page
view or visit, or 20 of either?
How much
 does each acquisition and activation cost?
How good
 are the customers who are being acquired? Active users/
spenders who return again and again or visitors with no “stickiness” at
all?
Metrics to Measure, in the “Get Customers” Funnel Web/Mobile
Channels
 (Figure 8.9)
For consistency’s sake, consider organizing the metrics the way the sales
funnel is organized—by acquisition and activation metrics. For example:
Acquisition metrics:
Total number of visits
 by visitor type, time of day, and source, and page
views per visit
Paid and referred traffic conversion rates
 by source (how many links or
banners, and at what cost, to generate one visitor or user) and cost per
acquired/activated user
Quantities and percentages of referred traffic
 by source
Unique behaviors
 or actions of subsets or segments of the customer
universe
I know I’m wasting half of my ad budget. I only
wish I knew which half...
 
Activation metrics
Total number of activations:
 another percentage of hourly/daily/weekly
acquisitions
Number/percentage of activations,
 tracked back to the original source
Number/percentage/cost per activation,
 based on quality (heavy users
and big spenders or modest spenders and inactive users?), wherever
identifiable, preferably by source
Number of visits, page views,
 referrals per activated user, by source and
by cost
Activation metrics also capture user behavior for assessment and
improvement. Typical behavior metrics include the number and percentage of
people who download or otherwise activate, register or engage within a
certain number of visits or page views.
Monitor people who take an activation action, like watching a demo, and
then don’t activate, as well as those who abandon during the enrollment or
registration process. Again, the list is endless, so be careful not to measure
more than the team can manage or improve on effectively.
This list is the tip of a huge iceberg. Focus on the ones that help you
understand customer behavior to efficiently drive acquisition and activation
and ultimately drive revenue!
“Grow Customer” Referrals happen through “Viral loops.”
(Figure 8.10)
Referral Metrics
Referral metrics are important because recommendations from existing
customers are the most cost-effective source of new customers. Key referral
metrics are:
number and percentage of users referred
average number of prospects existing customers
referral acceptance rate
Assess referral incentive programs to determine which incentives
motivate the most new users to refer others and the cost per referral.
At this point in the customer validation process, it’s too early to worry
much about 
customer retention
 (discussed in depth in Phase 2), since the
company’s overwhelming early focus is on getting its first customers. When
designing the metrics system, make sure it can accommodate metrics that will
be needed later to monitor retention and referral, including user 
cohorts
described in detail in Phase 2.
Use a dashboard or system to collect and monitor
data
Your startup’s future lies in its customer acquisition, activation and retention
data. This is so important that many web businesses actually display their
real-time site-performance data on a jumbo flat-screen monitor in the office
so that it’s always the center of attention. Off-the-shelf dashboard systems are
available, and home-grown solutions are readily built using tools as simple as
Excel.
Be careful not to overdo it with metrics. A small
number of metrics tell the overall “health” story of
the business.
 
Be careful not to overdo it with metrics. Generally, a relatively small
number of metrics tell the overall “health” story of the business, so resist the
temptation to generate complex, overwhelming collections of data that take
management eyes off the key issues. Those issues usually revolve around
“how many, how much, how fast”: how many customers are activated (or
lost), at what cost, and how quickly. Good CEOs have these key statistics as
well as their improvement trends and key drivers at their fingertips and can
recite them almost on cue. Equally important, they can be measured on a
whiteboard or a simple spreadsheet.
The metrics you use to measure and monitor your business ought to be
the same ones you and your board are looking at during board meetings. If
they’re 
only
 asking you for income statement, balance sheet and cash flow
and not looking at these numbers, you’ve failed as a CEO. It’s your job to get
your board to agree that the numbers you’re worrying about are the numbers
they’re worrying about.
Figure 8.11
 shows a dashboard for a simple content site where the
business goals are increased page views, customer referrals, and e-mail
delivery.

Example of a Simple Dashboard
 (Figure 8.11)
In the next step, if your startup doesn’t already have one, you’ll recruit
and install a “data chief” to manage the data and its interpretation. He’ll also
quarterback the company’s plan to use that data to drive continuous
improvement in the way customers discover, engage with, and use the
product and how they help sell it to their friends and colleagues.
Checklist 30: Build Metrics Toolset
Goal:
 Determine which key business metrics to measure and develop a
system or dashboard for collecting and monitoring data
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
  
12 key metrics identified: Basic visit metrics (page views, unique
visitors, pages/visit)
     
  Acquisition activities and behaviors
     
  Activation activities and behaviors
     
  Referral activities and behaviors
  
Dashboard created or purchased to collect and monitor data
     
  Focused on key metrics, not all metrics
     
  Easy, at-a-glance format
     
  Able to accommodate metrics needed later to monitor retention and
referral, including user cohorts
Exit criteria
:
     
  List of key metrics to measure for customer acquisition, activation and
referral efforts
     
  System for monitoring metrics near real-time
Get Ready to Sell: Hire a Data Analytics Chief
 In a startup that’s selling physical goods, it was the founders who first had
to find the sales roadmap and then hired a sales closer to assist them.
Likewise, a web/mobile company needs a dedicated data analytics chief after
the founders have discovered the key customer acquisition and activation
metrics. The analytics chief will drive “continuous improvement,” not just in
the customer validation process but in perpetuity.
The analytics chief will drive “continuous
improvement,” not just in the customer validation
process but in perpetuity.
 
At first, one of the founders may take on this role. (Extra credit if he’s
an experienced “data junkie,” statistical analyst, or “quant” who loves to
collect and pore over data, looking for anomalies, opportunities, trends and
weaknesses.) Whether the person’s called the chief marketing officer, the
data analytics chief, the database or online marketing director, or just plain
“founder” is irrelevant. Agility with numbers and tools are critical job skills,
as is innate curiosity. Also required: the “clout” to make things happen in the
company once the data shows that something isn’t happening per plan and
requires a pivot. Responsibilities include:
online optimization of targeted campaigns, managing all aspects of
customer behavior reporting, tracking, analysis, and optimization
management of all internal research, sponsorship, lead generation, and
promotion programs
development and management of plans, budgets costs and results of
marketing programs
management of budgets, forecasts, tracking and administration of
program costs and results
assuring the data is available to all key team members
If this person is not a founder, he or she must be a part of the senior
management team, reporting to and updating it regularly. He or she should be
hired as early as possible, ideally in time to participate in development of the
dashboard system and selection of the metrics it will track. He or she must
fully understand the business model and key business drivers, as he or she
will be a loud voice driving pivots and iterations. The person must be a good
collaborator, easy to work with, and highly creative—a rare combination.
This person must be a part of the senior
management team.
 
Agree on how often the CEO should be briefed. The management team?
The entire staff? Remember to focus the person on prioritizing and collecting
only key, actionable data, not reams of useless information. Craft both
compensation and confidentiality/no-compete agreements with this person,
who will know more about the company’s business drivers than virtually
anyone else. Losing this person prematurely can be a major setback.
Checklist 31: Hire a Data Analytics Sales Chief
Goal:
 Have a dedicated analytics expert on the senior management team
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
  
Analytics chief identified
     
  Agility with numbers and analytics tools
     
  Innate curiosity
     
  Highly creative
     
  Good collaborator
     
  Easy to work with
     
  Clout to make things happen when a pivot is required
  
Reporting schedule devised
Exit criteria
:
     
  Data Analytics expert hired to drive continuous improvement for the
company
Get Ready to Sell: Formalize the Advisory Board
Hopefully, you’ve asked for help from advisers on an informal basis in
customer discovery. In this phase, it’s time to formally engage them. There
are no hard and fast rules for how large an advisory board should be or
whether it should be a “board” at all. Basically, you want two things from
advisors: great introductions you can’t get any other way to key customers,
talent or investors; and bold, out-of-the-box business model design thinking
that will have dramatic impact on your strategy. All the rest is window
dressing.
Think strategically, not tactically, about advisors’ reach and sphere of
influence. Recruit only advisors who will make a serious impact on the
company in one way or another—think quality, not quantity. (If you’re
raising money having a cloud of “impressive names” may help, but don’t
confuse them with these people.) Formal advisory board meetings aren’t
required, at least for now, but this process should deliver access to experts
who can help.
Begin by assembling an advisory board road map, much like the
collateral roadmap developed earlier. As shown in 
Table 8.3
, the roadmap is
an organized list of the key advisors needed. (Don’t feel compelled to put
advisors in every box on the chart.)
In this example, the roadmap differentiates how each advisor will be
used (technical, business, customer, industry or marketing). Usually, the most
important advisors your startup can have are the ones with “golden
rolodexes” who can make high-level introductions to early customers,
channel partners, or partners who can deliver significant web traffic. Product
Development may need technical advisors as early as Phase 1 of customer
discovery. The technical advisory board is staffed with advisors from
academia or industry who can offer technical advice and pointers to technical
talent. As the company begins to sell product, these advisors are used as
technical references for customers.
Where possible, particularly in enterprise sales situations, put key
potential customers on the customer advisory board. These are people met in
customer discovery who can advise about the product from the customer’s
perspective. I always tell these advisors, “I want you on my advisory board so
I can learn how to build a product you’ll buy. We both fail if I can’t.” They’ll
serve as a customer conscience for the product, and later some will be great
references for, or introducers to, other customers. Use them for insight and
one-on-one meetings with the company’s business and Customer
Development staff—and don’t be afraid to ask them for specific
introductions.

Advisory Board Roles
 (Table 8.3)
Two other sets of advisors to consider: an industry advisory board of
domain experts who bring credibility to the company’s specific market or
technology; and an advisor to the CEO who’s a “been there, done that” CEO
type who can bring practical, how-to advice.
Make sure that, for people that count to you, you
count to them.
 
The number of advisors for each domain will obviously vary with
circumstances, but there are some rules of thumb. Both sales and marketing
advisors tend to have large egos. You can usually only manage only one of
them at a time. Industry advisors like to think of themselves as 
the
 pundits for
particular industries. Have them give you their opinions without being in the
same room or showing up on the same day—this allows you to sort through
whose advice you want to follow. Business advisors are much like marketing
advisors, but some have expertise in different stages of the company.
Consider keeping a few on hand to make you smarter. Finally, our product
development team could never get enough of the technical advisors. They’d
come in and make us smarter about specific technical issues. The same was
true for the customer advisors. Be sure to learn something new every time
they come by.
Compensating Advisors
The Oracle of Omaha, Warren Buffet, says it best: “Make sure that, for
people that count to you, you count to them.” That about sums it up. Advisers
typically receive common stock without precise correlation to the hours
they’ll give your company or exactly what they’ll do to help. The stock
typically vests over time, in monthly increments, so it’s easily adjusted based
on the adviser’s value to the company.
The best advisors of all 
pay you
 to become advisors.
They often make a modest cash investment.

 
The best advisors of all 
pay you
 to become advisors. They often make a
modest cash investment of, say, $20,000 or $100,000 for some of the
company’s preferred stock, and their investment is “boosted” with a generous
allocation of common shares that pay for the advisory services. Sophisticated
investors recognize the importance of advisors’ willingness to not only lend
their names but also invest some personal cash in what they clearly believe is
a significant opportunity.
Checklist 32: Formalize Advisory Board
Goal:
 Formally engage advisors who can facilitate high-level introductions
and are top-notch “out of the box” thinkers
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
  
Advisory board roadmap assembled
     
  Size – quality vs. quantity
     
  Ability to make high-level introductions
     
  Technical expertise
     
  Meetings or no meetings?
     
  Key potential customers
     
  Domain experts
     
  A seasoned CEO type
     
  Decide about compensation
Exit criteria
:
     
  Formal depiction of the size, makeup and operation of the company’s
advisory board(s)

CHAPTER 9
Customer Validation, Phase Two: Get Out
of the Building and Sell!
I
N THIS PHASE OF CUSTOMER VALIDATION
, it’s time to try to sell. Customer
discovery had you get out of the building twice, first to understand
customers’ problems and how they work and second to determine how well
the new product solves that problem. And while you’ve no doubt conducted
hundreds of tests to iterate and pivot your business model, there is no better
“pass/fail” test than asking a customer to give you an order or spend time
with your app or website.
In a physical channel, nothing validates a hypothesis better than a signed
order, especially when it’s signed before the product is either complete or
actually shipping. In the web/mobile channel, the equivalent validation is
attracting users or payers at the rate your hypotheses said you would. (In a
multi-sided market, even if you’re getting great traffic and growth, be sure
the “other” side, usually the advertisers or payers, are eager to spend to reach
your traffic.)
Your job in this phase is not to scale a revenue plan but to validate your
business model hypotheses with pass/fail tests that feel an awful lot like
selling or building web traffic. But revenue or traffic at full scale doesn’t
happen until the next step, customer creation. Customer validation is the 
test
sales process that—while it makes real sales—is principally aimed at
answering a long list of questions, including:
Are customers enthusiastic about the product’s value proposition?
Does the company understand its customer segments and their needs?
Do customers truly value the product features? Are any key features
missing?
Is the product pricing right, and can the product be sold at a reasonable
cost?
What’s the purchasing and approval process inside a customer’s
company?
Are the sales roadmap and channel strategy valid for scaling the sales
team?
Are there enough customers to make this a real business?
“Get out of the building” means one thing for companies with physical
goods or those primarily using the physical channel, and it means something
radically different for companies in the web/mobile channels. 
Figure 9.1
shows the differences.
In customer validation, the testing process is a series of elegantly simple
pass/fail tests where the answer is binary, and never “it feels good” or “they
like it.” Some examples:
If your physical channel business model says...
you will close two sales for every 10 sales calls, do you?
an average customer will buy six widgets in three months, do they?
$5,000 at spent at a tradeshow (or in direct mail) will generate 25 leads,
does it?
2/3 of the prospects you pitch will refer you to three friends each, do
they?
If your web/mobile channel business model says...
two of five acquired users will activate, do they?
four in 10 activators will pass your free trial offer to five friends, do
they?
$100 spent on AdWords will generate 50 clicks to your site, does it
happen?
one in four advertisers in your multi-sided market will sit still for your
advertising sales pitch (even though they probably won’t buy till you
have lots more traffic), do they?
Here are the next steps you’ll undertake, by channel:
Steps for “Get Out of the Building and Sell” by Channel
 (Figure 9.1)
Get Out of the Building: Prepare Optimization
Plans/Tools
 The job of optimization is to squeeze more out of each of the “get, keep
and grow” steps. Squeeze more of what, you ask? More of everything. For
example:
If 6 percent of visitors activate at launch, try to increase it to 10 percent
or more
When visitors abandon after two page views, can navigation increase it
to three?
If 5 percent of visitors post a comment, how can you encourage more to
do so?
If the average cost per activated user is $1, how can you lower it to
$0.75 or $0.80?
Can you improve e-mail open rates from 22 percent to 30 percent?
Getting more is what optimization is all about, and you’ll do it from this
moment until the moment you’re selling off your furniture or ringing the bell
at NASDAQ. This and the next two web/mobile sections provide a primer on
optimization, the subject of many full-length texts. In this section, you will:
Get a basic primer on optimization strategy
Take a look at how optimization goes to work at a hypothetical web
startup
and learn about the key optimization tools and how they work
The next optimize “Get” web/mobile section will take what you learn
from this section and show you how to put your “new” tools to work. And the
third section will do the same for “keep” and “grow” customers activities.
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 9.2)
Before you start
Before you start optimizing your site/app, just as a reminder that the
following building blocks must be in place:
1
. 
A hi-fidelity MVP.
 It must be live and the product should look “finished”
(even if the MVP isn’t fully featured). This ensures clear product
feedback and the most accurate measurement of “get customers”
program results.
2
. 
The Acquire plan and tools.
 E-mails, AdWords, banners, pr efforts, viral
programs and other tools that will drive consumers to engage with the
product.
3
. 
The Activate plan and tools.
 Home and landing pages encourage people
to buy, engage, or activate, supported with activation tools such as
follow-up e-mails, calls, or viral and promotion programs for those who
don’t buy or engage at once.
4
. 
A dashboard
 to monitor customers’ behavior. It should be working and
the product should be instrumented to deliver real-time data on results of
acquisition and activation programs.
Customer Optimization Strategy
Optimization efforts should focus on:
Volume:
 Acquire as many visitors as possible and drive to them to the
product
Cost:
 Steadily improve the cost per activated customer
Conversion:
 Increase the number of visitors who activate and become
customers or users
The first question to address
 is “What do I optimize?” Different types of
web business optimize for entirely different things.
The first question to address is, “What do I
optimize?”
 
Here’s how three types of web/mobile business should be thinking about their
“Get” customers optimization:
E-commerce sites
 should start by optimizing traffic and initial orders, of
course, and then move on to focus on average order size, repeat orders,
and customer referrals
Multi-sided markets
 (usually ad-supported) should focus first on total
traffic, then on members or subscribers, DAU (daily active users),
minutes of engagement, repeat visits, and referrals. They should then
move to the “other side” to maximize ad revenue, CPM, and sales
pipeline
Marketplaces
 should focus on everything an e-commerce site would
optimize as well as the number of vendors, seller acquisition and
retention and liquidity (how many of the items for sale actually get
sold). Then they should try to optimize daily transactions and average
transaction size
More Keys to Successful Optimization Strategy:
Know exactly why you’re testing,
 as in “to see if we can improve
registrations” or “to see if free shipping materially increases orders.”
Don’t test everything, test the important things.
 
Don’t overtest.
 This is a major mistake made by many web startups
because testing is just so easy online. Don’t test everything, test the
important things. Don’t test more than two changes to a page at a time,
to avoid confusing your visitors so you can tell which change drove
which improvement. When a test “succeeds,” be sure you know what
made the difference
Run controlled tests
 to guarantee randomness and validity. A strict A/B
test, the most common controlled test, shows every other visitor version
“A” or version “B” of a page or an offer. It rigorously controls the
variables. It doesn’t show “A” on Monday and “B” on Tuesday, since
there’s no way to determine what else might have influenced customer
behavior in the test, which could be almost anything: a sale at a
competitive site, a change in the weather, or even the time of day
(people mostly surf at work during lunchtime)
Always keep lifetime value in mind.
 The cost of getting a customer is
nowhere near as important as the revenue that customer brings you over
time, and the lifetime value math for “get customers” is pretty simple:
LTV=>CAQ
LTV
 or 
Lifetime value
 (the total amount of money you’ll make from this
customer) must be more than the 
CAQ
 or 
customer acquisition cost
 (costs to
acquire and activate the customer).
Too many companies go out of business telling themselves, “This
customer will be worth ‘X’ over five years,” forgetting the second part: “only
if we’re still here and they’re still with us.” Use a reasonable, not-too-long
lifetime value. For example, how many months of subscription revenue will it
take to repay my “get customers” cost?
In summary:
 The optimization plan will change often, perhaps as often
as every day. Start by defining the specific acquisition metrics to optimize.
Don’t tackle too many at once, and always know what your goal is when you
begin the experiment. As you’re running your tests, create alternatives for the
tactics that don’t perform well after optimization.
Optimization is a never-ending data-driven process
of “test, measure, tweak.”
 
Optimization is a never-ending data-driven process of “test, measure,
tweak” that stops only when the company closes its doors. Founders should
be intimately involved with, if not leading, the process, since it’s vital to your
company’s efficiency, scalability, and future.
A Lesson in Optimization Tactics
Let’s look at how optimization works in real time in a hypothetical company
selling the first in a series of downloadable $39.95 software apps for home-
based businesspeople. The CEO has focused her team on two key metrics at
the widest part of the funnel: the total cost of activating a customer (including
the cost of acquiring him or her), and the ultimate value of each activated
customer individually. Let’s follow along, starting with a look at the data
chief’s first analysis of acquisition and activation programs. Here’s how it
looks in chart form:
Example of Optimization Tactics Chart
 (Table 9.1)
Walking through the example one line at a time provides a wealth of insights
into the optimization process itself.
     •   
Acquisition
 delivered 200 “lookers” at an average cost of $5 per
customer click, or $1,000 (clicks can cost as little as pennies or as
much as $50 or more, depending on demand for the AdWords). If we
could reduce the cost per looker by 20 percent we would deliver 25
percent more prospects to the company without increasing the budget
          
   
Acquisition Improvements to test:
 Stop using the most expensive
AdWords. Try alternative sources of traffic beyond Google.
Explore alternative programs like banners and textlinks. Reduce
daily AdWords budgets or hours or geography (eliminate
overnight hours, Europe, or weekends for example). Increase viral
marketing at low cost
     •   
Activation
 40 people (20 percent of the 200 who clicked to the site)
activated – meaning they took a demo or provided their contact
information. Therefore the cost of each activation was $25 (or $1,000
spent divided by 40 people). Yet at this point no one has bought
anything
          
   
Activation Improvements to test:
 Intensify or enlarge calls to action
or graphics. Improve or increase activation incentives. Change
price or introductory offer. Reorganize the way features/benefits
are prioritized and explained. Consider a free trial
     •   
Purchase –
 half the activated customers buy an application for $39.95.
In this example that’s 20 people, each spending $40, for a total of
$800 in sales. These customers, while apparently profitable (on a
gross profit basis), are “losers” because it cost $25 to get someone to
spend $40—63 percent of the sale—which can’t be viable for most
businesses, as it leaves very little to cover product, staff, overhead
and, profit. But, if the funnel delivered just five more customers, the
same $1,000 investment would deliver $200 more in sales.
     •   
Purchase Improvements to test
          
   Deploy activation improvements, but also research non-buyers to
understand why they’re non-buyers
          
   Add a demo
          
   Add “click to call” contact option
          
   Conduct A/B tests of price and offer
          
   Consider follow-up e-mail or phone calls to close
Now take a last look at 
Table 9.1
. Imagine that in addition to the 20
buyers of our $39.95 software package, the company acquires 10 additional
Valued Customers. Instead of just buying one software product, these
customers buy on average 2.5 software packages, spending $100 each to do
so. That generates $1,000 in revenue from valued customers. Over time, these
Valued Customers are probably worth even more, since they may also
generate referrals to others and buy more packages themselves later.
In all, this test would be labeled at best a modest victory for some
(where the cost of goods is very low, as it is for software downloads).
Generating $1,800 in revenue as well as future prospects—activators who
never bought—with $1,000 on marketing spending reflects a software
company with a promising future, assuming it can further optimize its funnel
for the long term.) Clearly, improvements at every step of the funnel process
can deliver big incremental revenue and profit improvements.
Apply this kind of thinking and detailed analysis to every key program
outlined in your “get” plan. Test a program, measure the results, and
brainstorm 
ways to improve the results. Change some aspect of the program
(the offer, the graphics, the messaging, as outlined in your plan) and test it
and measure it again. Once it’s measured, assess the results, develop the next
improvement idea, and test it again... and again... and again. As we said at the
outset, this is the lifeblood of web/mobile startups, and the process truly
never ends.
Optimization Tools:
Like any good craftsperson, good tools are essential to doing a good job.
Here is an overview of the key tools used most often by web and mobile
marketers. In the next two web/mobile sections, we’ll talk to you about where
and how to use each one. In most cases, they’re used in each of the three get,
keep and grow optimizations, since most (but not all) customer interaction
happens online.
Sample A/B Tests Compare Changing Home Page Results
 (Figure 9.3)
A/B Testing
A/B testing is the most widely used way to optimize web and mobile “get,
keep and grow” activities. It can also be used to optimize web/mobile product
performance (the subject of a different book). A/B testing compares one web
page version with another to see which produces the best results. It’s the most
used method for testing key landing-page elements. Did a big blue button get
more activations than a small line of text? Which headline, picture, or product
offer generated more sign-ups, sales or abandons?
Activation mantra: The more we test, the better we
do.
 
Identify the key elements of your landing page that drive activation, and
test them carefully, fairly, and sequentially. Think of the process as “try it,
measure it, tweak it.” The activation mantra: The more we test, the better we
do. Remember to maintain a clear control group: change the presentation to
half the audience, ideally alternating from one visitor to the next (in A/B,
every second visitor sees “b”). Many testers drive 80% of the traffic to one
alternative, and 20% to the other, which can test on high-traffic pages well.
Usability Tests
Usability testing checks whether the users of the site/app/product use it the
way you intended them to. It can be as informal as inviting consumers into
the conference room and watching them spend time on the website or as
comprehensive as a formal focus-group testing. It can identify weaknesses in
the site’s explanation of the product, its benefits, and the reasons to buy. It
can trace users’ behavior on the site to determine ways to optimize the
conversion rates, enhance online product demonstrations, or find confusing
copy, diagrams, or navigation. Inexpensive tools and expensive services can
both help with the testing.
Usability Tests happen in Starbucks or test facilities
 (Figure 9.4)
Invite your target customers to the office and watch as they engage with
the site or app (and use any of the online services like Userfy or Usertesting
that do low-cost user testing). Watch these customers explore uninterrupted
while watching over their shoulder. Make notes about where they went and
where they didn’t, and follow up to learn why they did what they did.
Obviously, as you learn about confusing or suboptimal locations or
navigation on the site, test and measure alternatives until the problem goes
away. Consider conducting user testing with a laptop at Starbucks, where
random customers get coffee or a gift card for spending 10 minutes with you,
exploring and discussing the new product, app or site.
Heat Maps
Heat maps use eye tracking to show where most people look or click on a
website or page. Software tracks a user’s gaze and translates them into
regions colored yellow, orange and red. The richer the color, the more
eyeballs are focused on the button, headline or graphic.

Example of Heat Mapping
 (Figure 9.5)
If too many customers are drawn to the “demo” button instead of the
“try now” button, perhaps the sizes or locations or both should be changed.
The heat map indicates high-traffic spots on a page, where the most important
product features or offers should be located. Heat maps may even show that
visitors are clicking on graphics or copy that aren’t linked to anything.
Eye Tracking
Eye tracking uses heat-map technology in a different way. When people visit
a website, what do they look at first, second, or third?

Example of Eye Tracking
 (Figure 9.6)
The “Z” pattern is considered the most common way Americans read a
web page, starting across the top, from left to right, and then skimming
diagonally downward across the page. Eyes move at astounding speeds, and
users are known to spend as little as a few seconds scanning a page to find
something of interest. It pays to put key content and invitations for user
interaction in the places where the users tend to go. (Keep in mind that web
pages in other languages may scan differently.)
Copy Testing
While copy isn’t a tool the way a heat map or an A/B test might be, using
those and other tools to test copy makes the “copy buffer” a very important
tool. It’s almost axiomatic that no headline is ever the best possible headline,
and there’s always a way to improve “sell” copy, offer copy, and the way you
get people excited about your product, its features, and the reasons they
should buy. Copy testing can happen on the site, in focus groups, or through
web surveys. Bigger sites create alternate mirror sites to A/B-test different
copy versions. This is a powerful optimization tool.
Visitors focus on headlines, highlighted words and
bulleted lists but scan the text.
 
No matter how polished the prose or how many people edit the copy,
few visitors read all or even many of the words. Tests by industry expert
Jakob Nielsen suggest that most visitors focus on headlines, highlighted
words and bulleted lists but scan the text. He notes that the three most
effective design elements are plain text, faces, and cleavage and other body
parts.
In the next web/mobile section, you’ll strap on your e-toolbelt and go to
work, optimizing your “get” customers activities.
Checklist 33: Prepare Optimization Plans And
Tools
Goal:
 Prepare tools for testing the business model
Reference
: Chapter 9, Customer Validation Phase 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
  
Optimization metrics identified
  
Optimization priorities set
  
Testing tools in place
     
  Dashboard for monitoring results
     
  High-Fidelity MVP
     
  Acquire plan, tools
     
  Activation plan, tools
Exit criteria
:
     
  Plan that defines acquisition metrics to optimize
     
  Plan for how customer behavior will be monitored/optimized
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Get Out of the Building: Optimize Getting More
Customers
 In the prior phase, you got basic lessons in web and mobile performance
optimization, had some basic training in how optimization works, and
reviewed the tools and techniques you’ll use to create your optimization
strategy. This phase takes that learning and puts it to work at the widest part
of the “get customers” funnel—where customers come from—the acquire
and activate steps of “get, keep and grow.”
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 9.7)
For some websites 98 percent of people who visit (“acquired”) never
ever return. That means only two percent of acquired prospects have a chance
of becoming a customer or user, even after you’ve spent many millions
acquiring them. If that statistic doesn’t call attention to the need for
optimizing activation efforts, nothing will!

98 percent of people who visit never ever return...
 
How will Your Startup Optimize its “Get
Customers” Efforts?
Optimization objectives vary by your business model. For example:
Subscription products
 (e.g., software as a service) try to get customers to
explore, try, or use the product any way they’ll agree to do so, often with
freemium or low-cost trials
Expensive products and services
 strive to ensure that customers will be
driven to, and continue to engage with, the appropriate sales channel
Inexpensive apps and games
 often try to sell as soon as they engage
customers
Social networks
 will encourage first-timers to engage with the network,
participating at least a few times to get “hooked,” and then to invite
friends
Multi-sided market
 businesses try to attract users who will use the site
frequently, stay a long time, and bring their friends
Marketplaces
 (think Etsy or eBay) encourage sellers to join, list multiple
items, and enjoy early success on the site
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an overview and a
tutorial. There’s no way to implement or even process this in one sitting.
 
How to Run the “Get” Optimization Process
Review the results of the “get” programs you’ve done to date, always asking
your data and team, 
which program:
1
. 
is most important to us?
 Start with the free “get” programs for because if
they’re working they are the easiest to scale up. Accelerate the most
productive program. If you’re getting tons of customers from SEO or
bloggers, for example, start here to optimize that effort.
2
. 
is the most disappointing?
 When you launched your “get” programs,
you had great expectations for certain programs, whether it was an
AdWords campaign, referrals to friends, natural search or a blimp flying
over your city. Design pass/fail tests to improve the results.
3
. 
gives you the best customers?
 If, for example, an e-mail campaign gets
you customers who buy faster, spend more, or visit more often and stay
longer, you obviously want more of those folks. So prioritize the plan to
optimize that program.
4
. 
gives you early customers with high lifetime value
 (LTV)? Get and seek
more that look like them. Identify high-LTV behavior (frequent visits,
purchasing, posting or referrals, for example) in specific customers and
track back to their source, demography, or other common traits. Then go
find more customers like them. This is hardest in the company’s early
days, when few customers exist and there’s less time to observe them.
Test a wide range of offers, incentives, deals and
discounts.
 
Finally, test a wide range of offers, incentives, deals and discounts. While
alternatives are almost as obvious as they are endless, here are a few to try:
Offer a gift with purchase instead of a discount. Consider a time limit on the
offer, as in “until midnight only” or “this week’s special.” Create limited
offers, as in “for the first 500 to sign up.”
Always review the top 10 or 12 performance metrics daily, led by the
data chief recruited earlier. That’s a dozen metrics, not dozens—on the “get
customers” program results. Prepare to be disappointed often, but the review
—good or bad—always ends with the same question: “how do we improve
it?”
For less experienced web marketers
If you’re not an experienced web/mobile marketer, and don’t know an
important program from a disappointing one, try this approach instead. First,
focus on increasing the number of activations, since activations matter most.
(If you’ve acquired only a handful or a few dozen visitors, start talking about
possible pivots instead.)
Find the largest single source of customers and figure out how to
increase the volume. How does more spending, improved creative, different
offers or greater frequency improve the result? Test each one, one at a time,
and often more than once per test.
Remember, don’t optimize too many programs at once, or the results
will be confusing—you won’t be able to tell what worked and what didn’t.
Recognize “getting customers” means that the acquire and activate programs
work hand in hand. You need both parts to work to truly “get” a customer...
not just someone who comes to your site or app, but who buys and engages.
Common Optimization Opportunities and Problems
If this book were to list every possible way to optimize getting customers, it
would be impossible to carry. The balance of this section addresses the most
common problems where optimization can help—getting more clicks to your
site and more out of every click. Since we hear these questions from
entrepreneurs so often, we’ve organized the approaches to optimization based
on the questions we hear most.
Problem: I have a website but nobody visits...
Other than perhaps 
CIA.gov
, we don’t think there’s been a web business yet
that didn’t want more people exposed to its product or service, or more
visitors to its home page. Visitors are clearly the lifeblood of every
web/mobile business.
Diagnosis: You are perilously close to extinction. There are tens of millions
of websites, and just “being there” doesn’t drive traffic as a rule.
You are perilously close to extinction. Use every tool
we have described in the prior pages.
 
Solution:
1
. 
Return to the start of 
“Get Customers”
 web/mobile. Read it again and
get to work.
2
. 
Find more e-mails, Tweet more people, beg friends to invite their
friends, create a funny YouTube and try to viralize it.
3
. 
Consider changing the URL to something people will find more
naturally (your site’s promise, like “instantlove.com” rather than
“socialdatinginc.com, for example).
4
. 
Pay the smartest people you can find to optimize your site for natural
search in a hurry.
5
. 
Do something crazy.... big events, promotions, hand out flyers on street
corners, scream, set your hair on fire, but do it fast!
Tools to use: Use every tool we have described in the prior pages, then
go online and find dozens more. Start at 
www.steveblank.com
 for a thorough
updated list.
Problem: Visitors come to my site or app, but don’t stay...
This common problem presents many optimization opportunities.
Diagnosis:
 The most likely problem: something isn’t “clicking” with your
value proposition and product positioning, so start testing alternate versions.
Then look at the acquisition tactics you’re using and rank them based on
productivity (the most acquisitions with the least money or effort). Start with
the worst performing tactics and test alternatives.
Solution:
1
. 
Start by changing your messaging, whether you’re using e-mail, banner
ads, or banners pulled by WWII biplanes.
2
. 
If it’s AdWords, for example, pause all programs and start over. Spend
more per click, change the geography or hours your keywords are active
and for sure experiment by buying different AdWords and testing
alternate ad copy.
3
. 
Test alternative calls to action. Offer something for free, whether it’s a
trial or a prize for visiting the site. And keep running this optimization
process 
forever.
4
. 
Change the offer. If you’re offering annual signups, test monthly or
“first 30 days free.” Develop other reasons why people should come
visit your site.
5
. 
Interview lots of customers face-to-face. Find out what they like and,
more important, what they don’t.
6
. 
Be sure you have multiple calls to action on the home page (like “take a
tour,” “try now for free,” “learn more” 
and
 “get more info”).
Tools to Use: Copy testing, A/B testing, and another look at your value
proposition messaging (unique selling proposition, features you’re
promoting, introductory offer, to name a few).
Problem: People Visit the Site, but don’t Click (no Activation)...
Diagnosis:
 This deadly problem is often masked by “vanity metrics,” where
the team high-fives and celebrates because unique visitors and page views are
increasing every day. So what!! If people come to the site or app and don’t
engage, try it, do something, sign up or pay up, your business is simply dead.
Period.
If we just described your site, ring the alarm bell and if your “data chief”
and marketing person aren’t sure what to do or test, it may be time to call in
(preferably smart freelance) consultants, buy the tons of other books on
optimization, and call home and tell’em you won’t be home for a while...
your business is at serious risk of implosion.
Solution:
 Pull out all the stops, remembering not to test too many things all at
once. Start by talking to customers who’ve been acquired but not activated
(hopefully you have some of their e-mails, but 
call
 or ask them to call you—
don’t just e-mail) and find out what was uninteresting or unappealing to them
(that’s why it’s called Customer Development).
Then start to implement some optimization tactics.
1
. 
Find the page where most users abandon ship. Start testing stronger calls
to action and improved navigation on this page 
fast
2
. 
Test a variety of calls to action... click here to do this, sign up and get a
free...
3
. 
Do some heat mapping studies to see what people are looking at on the
page, and move calls to action closer to where their eyeballs go
4
. 
Test bigger, smaller, or different calls to action: louder copy, bigger
buttons, maybe a blinking or brightly-colored “try now,” for example
5
. 
Be sure your “no spam” guarantee/promise is visible in every
communication
6
. 
Conduct usability testing where you watch actual customers as they
review your home page. What questions do they ask, what do 
they click
on, do they get confused? Then ask them flat-out: “what don’t you like
about my site, product, or offer?”
7
. 
Buttons: Do more people click on a big ugly button or a small pink one?
Do they like round or square, a midpage location or lower left?
8
. 
“Sell” and body copy: constantly test new copy versions to see which
gets more response
9
. 
Graphics: Test alternative product pictures, illustrations, how-to
graphics and other elements to see better activations
Tools to Use: Every tool in the toolbox works overtime on this crisis.
A/B test everything. Spend money on usability testing and one-on-one
customer interviews. Use heat maps, magic tricks, anything you can find, as
your business is clearly threatened with extinction 
right now.
Problem: We’re Getting Some Customers, but they don’t refer others...
Diagnosis:
 While this is certainly a “get” customers problem, we consider it a
“grow” problem and address it in the next section. After all, to be technical,
first you have to acquire and activate a customer to “grow” him or her. There
are two ways to “grow” a customer: get them to spend more, or to refer
others. Both are addressed in the next web/mobile section.
Problem: People are engaging, but not doing what you want...
Diagnosis:
 You’re getting good traffic, and people are clicking or at least
viewing multiple pages. But nobody’s signing up, posting comments, playing
the game, adding pictures, spending money, or doing whatever you want
them to do.
Solution:
 Once again, you need to put almost the entire optimization toolbox
to work.
1
. 
Start with heat maps and eye tracking to see what people are actually
doing when they’re on the site
2
. 
Start A/B testing by first testing your calls to action. Make the graphics
different or bigger; consider adding demos or animation; Simplify the
messaging to make it clearer, and A/B test it both onsite and in person
3
. 
Develop more “pathways” through the site—make the navigation bigger
and test providing at least a few more options (“read more,” “free trial,”
and so forth)
4
. 
Can users easily sign up, post a comment, upload a picture, or buy
something on the site? If not, fix it.
5
. 
Do users make lots of errors downloading the app, a pdf or a picture? If
so, improve the process by rewriting the copy, adding graphics,
shortening the instructions or adding a video.
6
. 
Does anybody remember your headline or “sell points” five minutes
after visiting? If not, test alternatives
7
. 
Be sure your company’s positioning and promise, plus endorsements or
happy user quotes are prominent on the site to give users comfort
Tools to use: Use the entire toolbox: heat maps, eye tracking, A/B
testing, customer interviews, usability testing and a magic wand will all help.
Checklist 34: Optimize Getting Customers
Goal:
 Optimize “get customers” effort
Reference:
 Chapter 9, Customer Validation Part 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
     
  Customer Relationship hypotheses reviewed
     
  Dozen metrics identified for testing, daily monitoring
     
  Sequential plan for optimizing “get” funnel
     
  Optimization plan under way
     
  Spreadsheet for monitoring daily progress, next steps
     
  Test
     
  Retest
     
  Test again
Exit criteria
: Quick, cost-effective, proven means for getting customers
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Get Out of the Building: Optimize “Keep” and
“Grow”
 The common wisdom is that it cost 10 times more to get a new customer
than to keep and grow an existing one. Now that your company has users or
customers, this step optimizes how you “keep” and “grow” them. In the first
“optimize” phase, you chose a set of optimization tools and a plan for
deploying them to improve the results of your “keep” and “grow” efforts.
Now it’s time to put those plans into action. Believe us, this process is never-
ending.
The “Keep Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 9.8)
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an overview and a
tutorial. There’s no way to implement or even process this in one sitting.
 
Optimizing “Keep” (or Customer Retention)
Programs
Launch at least some basic customer retention and growth programs, you
developed in the customer-relationship hypotheses: loyalty programs,
customer check-in calls, customer-satisfaction surveys, product updates and
upgrades, and close monitoring of customer complaints. Where possible
(recognizing that it’s early and there aren’t many customers yet), monitor the
costs and return on investment for the programs individually to be sure
they’re incrementally profitable. Do customers in the “points” program spend
more and stay longer, for example?
Remember that customer retention, or “keep” customers, begins with
great products and customer service. Your customer-relationships hypothesis
should include a plan for testing at least a few of these programs now, during
customer validation.
Here are some things to watch for in the most common customer retention
programs, and ways to optimize the program results:
User outreach programs:
 What do customers say when you e-mail,
Tweet, or call them about their use of and satisfaction with the product?
Do they even take your calls or answer your e-mails? If not, consider
calling instead of e-mailing, or testing more urgent/ambitious subject
lines on your e-mails
If customers are responding in small numbers,
 add an incentive to
stimulate response, such as “Tell us your opinion and get a free month’s
service just for speaking up.” When you get negative feedback, first
respond, and then tell all your customers, not just the complainers, that
you’ve listened and made the improvements your customers suggested
Loyalty programs:
 First, are customers participating in the loyalty
program? If not, are you marketing it ambitiously enough? A/B-test
some special sign-up offers, like “5,000 bonus points just for joining to
get you started.” If you’re getting sign-ups, the next question is whether
the program creates incentive for the behavior you want, whether it’s
more active site use or more frequent purchasing. A/B-test 
different
messages, incentives, and promotions to get the most out of your
loyalty-program participants
Contests and events:
 These can only help retention if people participate,
so A/B-test, copy-test, and constantly refresh promotional campaigns
both on the site and through e-mail to users. Do your changes get more
people to participate? If not, keep testing. Over time (at least three
weeks, maybe longer), monitor whether the use of these promotions and
contests is driving the behavior you want, be it more clicks, uploads,
downloads, or purchases. Keep A/B-testing new options forever!
Information feeds:
 Whether you’re using a blog, an RSS feed, e-mail or
smoke signals to keep your customers updated on product
enhancements, how-to tips, or other helpful information, they’re of little
help if nobody reads them. A/B-test a variety of ways of delivering the
same message, using different headlines and headline sizes, videos,
cartoons, or diagrams. Consider making offers like “get bonus points for
reading (or forwarding) our latest bulletins.” This exercise, like most
customer-loyalty efforts, continues forever as well
Watch the initial results of each program for perhaps a week or 10 days,
at least at first (in reality, you’ll be watching and optimizing them
indefinitely). Never look at the programs as a whole, since each keep activity
will operate independently.
Cohort Analysis Should Guide your “Keep” Efforts
Cohort analysis should guide retention efforts. A cohort is a group of
customers with common attributes, and in the web/mobile channels, the key
cohort to watch is the customer activation date. Why? New customers may
stay for months, while older customers may tire after perhaps three or four
months. New customers may visit 10 times a week, staying 20 minutes per
visit, while older customers visit twice a week for 10 minutes each time.
Measuring retention based on averages can be extremely deceptive,
suggesting, say, that retention is OK since we lose only 8 percent of our
customers every month. But if those customers were all heavy users or
spenders or all disappear in two months or five months, the company
obviously has a problem. Studying users in terms of cohorts rather than in
aggregate makes it much easier to spot danger signs.

Cohort Analysis of a Sales Funnel
 (Figure 9.9)
Another important cohort to consider (usually when there are at least
many thousands of customers) is users by source: do customers referred by
Google stay longer than or not as long as those referred by Bing or Yahoo?
Do customers who first accept a free trial leave more quickly than those who
pay from Day One? Each cohort analysis delivers a strategy for improving
retention.
Optimize “Grow” Customers
There are two ways to grow customers: get customers to buy more, or get
them to refer other customers to the company.
The optimization principles for growing new revenue are described in
Chapter 3
 and can be helped by cohort analysis, described above.
“Grow Customers” Activation Activities in Web/Mobile Channels
(Figure 9.10)
Get Customers to Buy More
Here are key metrics to optimize when trying to grow revenues and
customers:
Incremental dollars
 (above initial order) sold, on average, to all
customers: if you’re not getting at least 15 percent larger orders from
repeat customers, you’re not working hard enough. Experiment with
more and different offers, add more generous offers, and find additional
places to make the offers
The “
take rate:
” This is the percentage of customers reviewing (and
taking) an upsell/next-sell offer. It tells you how well the upsell is
working. Aim for a double-digit take rate even though it may not always
be achievable. A/B-test more generous offers and spontaneous offers
that seem urgent (“24-hour sale” or “today only”), and (see above) find
other innovative places, media, and ideas for promoting upsells
Average order size:
 Also called “market basket” (a century-old term
borrowed from the physical channel). Make the order bigger by A/B-
testing a variety of offers, such as longer-term subscriptions, “bonus”
products for people taking the upsell offer, and deeper discounts on the
upsell. Remember you’ve already spent the “big” money acquiring this
customer, so accept a more narrow margin on these incremental
revenues
Number of opt-outs
 or closed accounts resulting from additional offers:
This is an important “watch out” number that’ll quickly tell you if
you’re being too pushy. Look at your overall opt-out rate, and if these
grow offers increase that rate by 25 percent or more (it should be around
2 percent or 3 percent), either slow down your efforts, tone down your
copy, or call some customers and find out what they liked and didn’t
like and adjust accordingly
You’ll be amazed how delighted many customers
will be to receive an e-mail or, better yet, a phone
call.
 
Customer Satisfaction:
 Getting existing customers to buy more starts by
ensuring that they’re satisfied with the product, its performance and the
price. Unhappy customers won’t be buying from you again. Stay in
touch with your customers through regular satisfaction surveys, outreach
phone calls, and the like
You’ll be amazed how delighted many customers will be to receive an
e-mail or, better yet, a phone call saying, “Hi, we just want to thank you for
your business and find out how you’re liking our product.” You can usually
gently slide in a special offer or a discount on more purchases toward the end
of the call or e-mail. These basic customer-growth strategies work in
consumer goods as well as business-to-business.
Get Customers to Refer Other Customers
Customer referrals are by far the most powerful, leverageable opportunities to
get more customers and thus increase revenue. Why? Because invitations
from one friend to another saying “try this” are highly credible and often free.
Referral metrics to optimize include:
percentage and number of customers sending e-mails, Tweets, messages
to friends
average number of referrals per customer
conversion (or acceptance) rate of customer referral offers
purchases, activations, or sign-ups per user and per member referred by
other members or customers
Many of the viral marketing techniques discussed earlier, such as getting
users to “like” the company on Facebook or re-Tweet news of a new game or
app, adds the friend’s credibility and endorsement to your marketing
message. Most consumers prefer to get messages from friends rather than
marketers, knowing their friends wouldn’t tout something of little interest.
Start with Two “Grow” Metrics
Two metrics guide the monitoring of “Grow” efforts: viral growth factor and
customer lifetime value.
The viral growth factor,
 or 
viral coefficient
, helps measure the number
of activated users referred by your current users. If a user invites five friends
but only one actually activates and buys from or signs up for your site, your
viral coefficient is 1.0 (one user refers one activated new user, or 1 for 1), the
minimum for real viral growth. Think about it—you’d actually double your
audience if every customer got you one more activated customer!!
How do you calculate your viral coefficient?
     Here’s an example. Imagine 100 users of your site each refer 10 friends
who come to your site or app delivering 1,000 “acquired” users lucky
you). Now imagine if 15 percent of those invited friends (150) actually
sign up, buy, or engage (making them activated users).
Calculations:
1
. 
Start with the number of users (100)
2
. 
Multiply users by the average number they referred (100×10)
3
. 
Then compute the average conversion to “activated” users (15%)
4
. 
You now have 150 new users (15% of 1,000 have activated)
5
. 
The result = 150 new users divided by 100 “old” users equal a viral
coefficient of 1.5
Work to achieve a viral coefficient greater than 1.2 or 1.3, which is
closer to linear or modest growth and not dramatic. Ideally, you’ll experience
the kind of explosive growth seen from a top YouTube video, a hilarious
joke, or a scam e-mail like “get a free iPad.” Many people forward hilarious
YouTube videos or jokes to dozens of people or more, many of whom watch
the video or read the joke. This can deliver superb viral coefficients of 12, 20,
or even more. The higher the coefficient, the faster the resulting viral growth
and the more customers you’re adding at any given time. With any viral
coefficient below 1, you’re stagnant at best.
A top YouTube video or a hilarious joke can deliver
superb viral coefficients.
 
Be careful to measure activated users, not just gross referrals, which can
deceive you. What good is it if a customer brings 10 people to a store, for
example, and they sure do like the fashion, but none spend a dime?
The work to increase a viral coefficient is hard—very hard—because it’s
the greatest single source of new customers at the lowest possible cost. Use
all the tactics we’ve already described, including:
A/B test the offer, the copy, the calls to action
Create and test incentives, promotions, deals and discounts
Test a variety of incentives to encourage people to refer their friends...
be sure to incentivize both the current and the potential customer
Apply the core “get customers” tactics to every step in this process,
since while this is a referral, it’s all about getting a new customer
Recognize, too, that nothing creates great virality better than a great
product! Not lots of people go out of their way to tell any of their friends
about a boring company with mediocre products and service. Monitor the
viral growth factor at least weekly, constantly brainstorming ways to improve
the score.
Optimization never ends.
 
Keep in mind that not all products on the web are viral. Social media is
viral. Multiplayer games are viral. But there are sites in some categories that
you definitely don’t invite lots of friends to (dating sites, spouse-cheating
sites, legal and illegal drug sites, etc.). YouTube is perhaps the canonical
example of a high-coefficient site. Think about the last hilarious YouTube
video you viewed. How many friends did you forward it to?
Customer lifetime value
 (LTV), or how much the customer is worth to
the company, can grow in several different ways: a customer buys more,
refers more new customers or, in the case of multi-sided markets, become
more active on the site and generate greater revenue for the company. “Grow
customers” programs are the primary driver of lifetime value growth.
Monitor LTV growth over time, and use new programs and offers and
improve efficiency.
Multi-sided Markets Must Optimize the “Other
Side”
As discussed earlier, startups operating multi-sided markets need to optimize
the “other side” of their market, the side that generates cash. It’s time to get
out of the building and verify the hypothesis that certain advertisers find the
audience attractive and will pay the CPM ad rates that the hypothesis
indicates will drive a profitable business model.
While orders would be lovely at this point, the primary objective is
validation of the potential revenue so glowingly described in the hypothesis
and your pitch to investors.
Follow the “get customers” processes outlined earlier (you are getting
customers, after all), recognizing that you basically have to do most of the
work a second time. Why? The acquisition activities and sales pitch to the
payer side of a market are totally different from the materials, positioning,
and value proposition that attracts free users to the site or app. Don’t expect
orders or revenue yet, since traffic will be negligible, but:
Learn the rules of the game: Does the site need to have a million page
views a week or a month in order to be considered? Are certain ad units
or features required? Is the audience distinctive enough to command an
ad-rate premium? Are there any other rules about content, longevity, or
anything else that might prevent a deal?
Determine the sales roadmap: How long does it take to get an order, and
how many steps does the approval process involve? Does the advertiser
make its buys once or twice a year or on an ongoing basis? How big are
typical initial insertion orders? Who needs to approve the site, the price,
the content? How might you get an order sooner?
Summary: Optimization never ends!
Checklist 35: Optimize “Keep” And “Grow”
Results
Goal
: Improve methods for retaining and “growing” customers
Reference:
 Chapter 9, Customer Validation Part 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
  
Basic customer retention and growth programs launched
     
  Costs, ROI monitored for each
  
Cohort analysis under way
  
Two “Grow” metrics
     
  Viral Growth Factor
     
  Customer Lifetime Value
  
“Other side” of multi-sided market also optimized
     
  Learn how “other side” works, buys
     
  Determine sales roadmap for “other side”
  
Revenue model refined based on learning from optimization efforts
Exit criteria:
     
  Optimized “keep” and “grow” processes
     
  Validated sales potential of app or site
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Get Out of the Building: Test Sell Traffic Partners
 It’s not uncommon to hear, “Well, I built a website, but nobody came to
it.” This is the death knell for a startup in the web/mobile channel. You need
partners to drive traffic to your site, whether they run textlinks to you, post
banner ads encouraging their visitors to visit you, or highlight some of your
content or even your features on their site with links to yours. A wide variety
of partnerships can be used to increase traffic. In web companies, the
function is often called “business development.”
A few examples of the types of partnerships:
A social network might get traffic from other related commerce or
content websites
A kid-game company might offer a free trial version on kid-oriented
websites
A computer parts e-tailer might get traffic from computer-news sites
Meet prospective partners and try to sign the traffic deals you envisioned
in the traffic-partners hypothesis. If you do, how much revenue or traffic will
they actually deliver, and at what cost? Set up meetings with sites that reach
the same types of customers you want to reach and start making deals like
these:
Feature content from each other’s sites with links to the partner’s site.
Swap e-mail lists so each partner can introduce its users or customers to
the other
Trade ads and textlinks on your partner’s site for those on your own,
using unsold inventory at each site
Highlight the partner as a “content partner” or otherwise promote each
other on site
Create microsites with noncompetitive content or offers on each other’s
sites
Offer one site’s features (social networking or free games, for example)
on the other
The list of traffic opportunities is virtually endless and provides a great
creative challenge that can deliver massive incremental traffic to one partner
or both. When one partner benefits more than the other, cash often brings the
trade back into balance. Cash offers are the best way to get a prospective
partner’s attention. Use your initial conversations to compare the potential
volume and cost of partner-delivered revenue or traffic with the traffic your
company generates on its own. Get some traffic partnerships going as fast as
you can, and monitor and evaluate the results.
Partnership opportunities are viewed as a dime a
dozen.
 
Identify your target partners from lists developed in the traffic-partner
hypothesis. Recognize that these meetings are largely exploratory in nature,
since the first question a prospective partner is likely to ask is “How much
traffic do you have now?” and the answer is probably very close to zero at
this stage of the validation process. After all, most partnerships are mutually
beneficial, and before scheduling a meeting, the partner candidate is likely to
want to understand what’s in it for him or her.
These meetings are hard to get. Partnership opportunities are viewed as
a dime a dozen, and companies are reluctant to spend time on all but the
biggest opportunities. Some tips for breaking through the barrier:
Use personal referrals and aggressive follow-up as described in the
“customer contacts” section of customer discovery
Focus the introductory e-mail on what’s in it for the potential partner.
This might include traffic, money, or new customers, depending on how
the partnership works
Explain your startup’s vision and why partnering with your new
company is important
Network at appropriate conferences and trade shows to meet partners
face-to-face
Not every deal needs to be signed in these initial meetings, especially
since these commitments are hard to come by
Create a post-meeting report card that assesses and estimates the size of
the opportunity: how much traffic, and how much cost. Use a report card to
track and quantify results.
Checklist 36: Test Sell Traffic Partners
Goal
: Validate your traffic partner strategy
Reference:
 Chapter 9, Customer Validation Part 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
  
Traffic partner targets identified and researched
  
Meetings scheduled
     
  Introductory e-mail
     
  Reference story and script
  
Report card for estimating sales from each channel
  
Spreadsheet for summarizing data
Exit criteria
     
  Deals or firm commitments from prospective traffic partners
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 10
Customer Validation, Phase Three: Develop
Product and Company Positioning
I
N THIS PHASE OF CUSTOMER VALIDATION
,
 you’ll use all the test results from
your experiments about customers, their reactions to the initial value
proposition, and why they buy. The result is two positioning statements: one
for the company and one for the product. In this phase, you’ll:
develop product positioning
match product positioning to market type
develop a company positioning
make presentations to analysts and industry influencers to validate the
positioning
Positioning is the attempt to control the public’s perception of a product
or service as it relates to competitive products. In Phase 1 of validation, you
crafted 
initial positioning
 for product and company, but formal positioning at
that time 
would have involved too much guesswork. Now, with 50 or 250
face-to-face customer interviews and thousands of online customer
interactions under your belt, the company has real facts about why customers
buy and real customers to help further test and refine your positioning.
Thus far, even through the validation stage, spending on customer
acquisition has been modest and the risks relatively low. But now, as the
company prepares to scale from dozens or hundreds of customers to
thousands or even millions, it needs to be able to communicate what the
product is and does, and why the customer should buy or use it.
No PR Agency
Most technology-driven startups believe they need professional “marketing
people” from a public relations agency to execute this positioning phase. In
reality, the first pass is best-done (and far more affordably) by the Customer
Development team with feedback from Product Development. At this
moment, no one is closer to the customer or better understands what
problems customers say the product solves. No one else has struggled to learn
customers needs, get an order, and find a repeatable sales process. The
Customer Development team is clearly best-qualified to develop a first pass
at describing what makes the company and the product unique. Later, during
customer creation, it’ll be time to bring in the “experts” and their monthly
retainers and invoices. By then you’ll be able to hand them facts explaining
why customers bought.
The Positioning Audit
Before the company spends time on positioning, it’s a good idea to air out the
conference room and get some facts. The best way to do this is with a
positioning audit. An audit is an unbiased way to learn how others perceive
your company and products. An 
external audit
 interviews a representative
sample of people from a variety of categories, including customers who know
or have heard of your company and those who don’t; others who will carry
your message for you (industry analysts and influencers, bloggers, members
of the press, and others); competitors and others who are knowledgeable
about the industry or market.

Example of an External Audit Questionnaire
 (Figure 10.1)
Each interview asks these groups a series of questions about how they
perceive your company and its key competitors: Do they know and respect
your product, your reputation, and your leadership? Do they think your
company is a credible, trustworthy provider of the product or service it’s
selling, and where do they think it fits in the competitive set? The results
form a baseline of the perceptions others have about your company.
Form a baseline of the perceptions others have
about your company.
 
Once you understand what others think (usually a surprise to most
startups breathing the rarefied air of their own conference rooms), the
company can work on changing and shaping those opinions. An example of
an external audit questionnaire for customers, press, influencers, and analysts
is shown in 
Figure 10.1
.
While conducting an audit is the kind of activity pr agencies excel at,
handing this function off completely is a serious mistake in a startup. Just as
your early sales calls were too important to be handled by salespeople, your
early audits are too important to be handed off to a pr agency. The members
of the founding team should at least perform the first five or ten calls
themselves.
Listening to external perceptions of the company is half of this audit
step. Listening inside the company is the other half. An 
internal audit
 directs
the same questions to the founding team executive staff and board members.
Most startups assume they have complete internal unanimity on the all the
issues in the external audit. An internal audit will probably reveal that you
have a cacophony of voices (and you most definitely don’t want to be out of
sync with your investors.) The internal audit should unearth those differences
and extract new ideas. When the company has agreed on a final positioning at
the end of this phase, you communicate those ideas back to the entire
organization so it speaks with one voice.
Develop Positioning: Product Positioning
In this step you’ll put a stake in the ground and formalize the product’s
positioning. The positioning doesn’t have to be perfect, since it will be
refined further during customer creation. The result of this product-
positioning step is a one-page “product positioning brief” that updates the
positioning briefs developed earlier. As sales literature (data sheets, sales
presentations, website and copy) and marketing campaigns are created, this
brief should be used to keep all the messages “on point.”
Feedback from customers and channel partners in customer discovery
and customer validation has continually refined or affirmed the answer to
what your positioning is. You wrote your first version of a positioning
statement when you created the sales presentation, answering the question of
why an early customer should buy the product. Think about customers’
reaction to that description. Did it generate excitement? Was it credible? If
customers couldn’t or didn’t explain why the product was interesting to them
—or not—do you understand why? If not, re-contact them and find out the
reasons. There’s no better input into product positioning than feedback from
folks who were exposed to the product itself.
The Product Positioning Brief
Return to the simple, single-phrase positioning statement you developed at
the outset of customer validation (remember “Absolutely positively
overnight” from FedEx?). Did it resonate with the customers encountered
during the validation process? Did they find think it explained why they
should buy the product or what it did, and did they find it credible and
effective? If not, back to the drawing board.
To refresh your memory, review 
product positioning example
 developed
early in Chapter 8 (which may have been several months ago by now):
Example of Product Positioning
 (Figure 10.2)
A thorough positioning effort made soon after customer-validation
interviews will often save the company time and money at the start of
customer creation. If it already knows how to position the new product
against competition in a way that resonates with customers, it can hire a pr or
marketing communications agency and have it get right to work creating buzz
or promotional materials or both. Neither time nor dollars are wasted on
ponderous, costly positioning studies and analyses. Instead, the agency is told
“here’s the positioning. Run with it unless you have a significantly better
idea.” The agency will know how to package the product, the pr messages,
and other marketing communications tools and can get right to work
generating results. (Agencies hate this, because thinking and “strategizing”
are far more lucrative and less accountable activities.)
Product Positioning by Market Type
 (Table 10.1)
Checklist 37: Develop Product Positioning
Goal: Formalize your 
product’s
 positioning by Market Type
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
     
  Initial product positioning brief reviewed
     
  Customer feedback factored in
     
  Product positioning updated and refined
Exit criteria
:
     
  Revised product positioning brief
Develop Positioning: Match Positioning to Market
Type
Market type dramatically changes the messages your company wants to send
about itself and its products. So now it’s time to match the positioning to the
market type you’ve selected.
For an Existing Market
If you’re entering an existing market, company positioning is about creating
the notion that your company is both different and credible. And solves a
problem that customers believe is important. When Apple entered the
smartphone market, people understood that the company was a manufacturer
of iPods but was now going to offer a phone and a web browser, too.
Once your company positioning is chosen, product positioning follows.
Since in an existing market comparable products exist, product positioning
typically describes how and why your product is different along an existing
axis/basis of competition. Differentiation in an existing market can take one
of three forms: you can describe differences in product attributes (faster,
cheaper, less filling, 30 percent more), in distribution channel (pizza in 30
minutes, home delivery, see your nearest dealer, build it yourself on the web),
or in service (five-year, 50,000-mile automobile warranty, 90-day money-
back guarantee, lifetime warranty). Or it can take the form of how the product
fills a need or solves a problem the customer was searching for.
For a New Market
If you’re creating a new market, company positioning can’t be about how
different your company is, since by definition there are no other companies to
compare it with in a new market. So in a new market, company positioning is
about communicating a vision of and passion for what could be. It answers
the questions “What’s wrong with the world that you want to make right?”
and “What is it that your company is trying to change?” When Airbnb
reinvented hotel/motel/bed and 
breakfasts with “peer-to-peer”
accommodations, they first had to communicate a radical idea: people would
want to rent out their homes to strangers who would want to stay in other
strangers’ homes.
After positioning the company, positioning the product in a new market
becomes pretty simple. Touting a new product’s features is unproductive,
since there’s no context for understanding them—no comparable products
exist—and customers have no idea what you’re talking about. If Airbnb had
positioned its service as “rooms for $89” or “sleep in a stranger’s bed” no one
would have had a clue what it was talking about. Instead, Airbnb positioning
talked about a “sharing economy” and emphasized the economic benefits for
both parties.
In a Clone Market
Cloning a business model from the U.S. that hasn’t made it to your country
(due to language, cultural or legal barriers) is a viable business strategy.
Clones are typically found in countries such as China, Russia, Brazil, India
and Indonesia that are large enough to grow companies to substantial size
(greater than 100 million people).
Company positioning can’t be about how different your company is, as
there are no other companies in your country to compare it with, but you can
act as if you can predict the future. You know how the equivalent companies
are positioned in the U.S. Clone their positioning.
The same is true for product positioning. Touting a new product’s
features is unproductive at first, as there’s no immediate context for
understanding the features—no comparable products exist—and customers
have no idea what you’re talking about. But here again you can pretend to be
psychic. You know how the equivalent companies are positioned in the U.S.
As soon as the market is educated, clone their positioning.
For Re-Segmenting a Market
If you’re re-segmenting an existing market, company positioning depends on
market segmentation. Segmentation means you’ve picked a clear and distinct
spot in customers’ minds that’s unique and understandable. Most important,
concerns something they value and want and need now. Company positioning
for this market 
type communicates your deep understanding of customer
problems/needs for un-or underserved markets. And your astute
understanding of how to uniquely solve it.
There are two types of market re-segmentation; a segmented niche and a
low-cost provider. Two examples of low-cost re-segmentation are Jetblue and
Southwest Airlines. Both offer cheap fares matched by minimal frills, they
entered the airline business low-cost passenger airlines that provide high-
quality customer service on point-to-point routes.
There are two types of market re-segmentation; a
segmented niche and a low-cost provider.
 
The rise of Walmart was another example of an entrepreneur’s
recognition that an existing market was ripe for a niche re-segmentation. In
the 1960s and ’70s, Sears and Kmart dominated big-box discount retailing,
opening large stores where there was sufficient population to sustain them.
Smaller communities got catalog stores (Sears) or were simply ignored
(Kmart). Sam Walton saw towns dismissed as “too small” as an opportunity.
“Small towns first” was his unique niche re-segmentation. Once established,
Walmart proudly positioned itself as a “discounter”—a sobriquet the large
retailers avoided like the plague. They sold name-brand health and beauty
aids at cost. This strategy, supported by heavy advertising, pulled in
customers who then bought other products which, while priced low, carried
high gross margins. Equally important, Walmart adoption of cutting-edge
technology to track how people shop and to buy, and its ability to deliver
goods more efficiently and cheaply reduced its cost of sales to a small
fraction of competitors’. By 2002, Kmart was bankrupt and Walmart was the
largest company in the world.
When you’re re-segmenting a market, product positioning is a hybrid of
market and existing market positionings. Since your segmentation has moved
your product into a space adjacent to your competitors, product positioning
describes how and why your new segment is different and important to your
customers.
Checklist 38: Match Positioning To Market Type
Goal
: Ensure product positioning matches company’s market type
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
  
Existing and Re-segmented Markets
: Product compared to its
competitors’
  
New Market
: Vision and passion of what could be communicated
  
Clone Market
: Knowledge of comparative firms used to “predict the
future”
Exit criteria:
     
  Ensure product position matches market type
     
  Validate positioning with customers
Develop Positioning: Company Positioning
With the product positioned in one of the four market types, articulate
company positioning the same way. What’s the difference between product
positioning and company positioning? Product positioning focused on the
specific product attributes within a market type, while company positioning
answers the questions “What does this company do for me?” and “Why do I
want to do business with them?” and “Why does this company exist and how
is it different?”
Write the first version of a company positioning statement as simply as
possible, always keeping customers in mind. Describe the company to
encourage potential customers to say, “Tell me more. It sounds like you’re
solving a problem I have.”
Here’s a great but verbose example from 
Amazon.com
: “We seek to be
Earth’s most customer-centric company for three primary customer sets:
consumer customers, seller customers, and developer customers.” UPS points
to its breadth: “As the world’s largest package delivery company and a
leading global provider of specialized transportation and logistics services,
UPS continues to develop the frontiers of logistics, supply chain
management, and e-Commerce, ...combining the flows of goods, information,
and funds.” One more, from the simpler, more narrowly focused Zappos,
speaks volumes about why you’d want to do business with the company:
“We’ve aligned the entire organization around one mission: to provide the
best customer service possible. Internally, we call this our WOW
philosophy.” Notice, that company positioning is not about product or
features.
Sometimes, founders creating a new market are tempted to name the
new market. This can be helpful or, more often, dangerous and expensive.
Generally it’s helpful only if it helps explain the product’s attributes, with
terms like 
handheld video game
 or 
instant photography
. If the new market
name is cute or esoteric, prepare to spend lots of money explaining the
market and why it’s important to customers, who need a frame of reference to
understand the company positioning. 
No-frills airlines
 and 
movies on demand
explain markets and position new companies within them. Tivo spent
hundreds of millions convincing customers it wasn’t a digital VCR.
Table 10.2
 illustrates company positioning by market type. Like product
positioning, company positioning doesn’t have to be perfect yet, since it will
be refined further during customer creation.
Company Positioning by Market Type
 (Table 10.2)
As with product positioning, the result of this exercise should be a
“company positioning brief,” 
brief
 being the operative word. As marketing
literature (press backgrounder, sales presentations, website) unfolds, this brief
will be used in conjunction with the product brief for consistency’s sake.
As a consistency check for company positioning, revisit the mission
statement written during customer discovery. How did customers react to it
during validation interviews? Did they find that explained why the company
is different or special and encourage them to do business with the company?
In addition, compare the company’s description and mission statement with
those of its competitors. What are their company positionings, and is the new
company’s positioning distinct or differentiated, particularly as buyers are
concerned. Is it simple? Beware: unsubstantiated superlatives like 
easiest,
best
 and 
greatest
 are meaningless. Demonstrable, provable claims like 
fastest
and 
cheapest
 are stronger, although cheapest is a high-risk strategy as a rule,
since competition can quickly respond.
Unsubstantiated superlatives like 
easiest
, 
best
 and
greatest
 are meaningless. Demonstrable, provable
claims like 
fastest
 and 
cheapest
 are stronger.
 
Checklist 39: Develop Company Positioning
Goal
: Articulate Company Positioning
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
  
Mission statement developed in Customer Discovery revisited
  
Company description, mission statement compared to competitors’
  
Company positioning statement drafted
     
  Simple
     
  Keeps customers in mind
     
  What Company does for me
     
  Why do I want to do business with them?
     
  Why does this company exist and how is it different?
     
  Matched to Market Type
Exit criteria:
     
  Statement that fully articulates the Company’s vision and mission
Develop Positioning: Validate Positioning
Industry analysts and influencers help deliver the foundation of credibility
that a startup needs. What’s an industry analyst? In the technology arena,
many firms charge customers to provide an “independent” and dispassionate
analysis of markets, trends, or specific products and their fit in those markets.
These firms vary in size and influence. In some technical markets (enterprise
software, for example) sales to large companies are very difficult until one of
the large analyst firms (Gartner, Forrester, Yankee) has blessed the product,
particularly if it’s new. In the entertainment business it might be Kagan, in
consumer products the NPD group.
Unlike analysts, industry influencers are a less formal category. Every
industry has a handful of pundits who publish articles, write blogs or hold
conferences, and their prominence in the field influences what gets talked
about. Sometimes these influentials work at industry-leading companies but
speak at lots of conferences. Other influentials include writers at general,
business, or trade publications. Sometimes they teach at universities.
Test to see if they’ll sing your company song.
 
Identification of key analysts and industry influencers began in customer
discovery. Meet them and get their insights and feedback on the initial
positioning (market, product, and company) just created and their thoughts
about product features. Test to see if they’ll sing your company song (and if
not, figure out why). Even though early adopters will be evangelizing the
product inside their company or to their friends and family, it helps to have
other “outsiders” who will say, “Yes, we’ve heard of them, and while it’s too
early to say how good their product is, we think their idea is quite valuable.”
It’s also important to line up industry analysts and influencers as references
for press interactions in the customer creation step.
All this would have been difficult without real customer contacts,
feedback, and orders, but now it’s appropriate to contact the analysts and
influencers who have been tracked since early on in customer discovery.
Hopefully, their names were recorded in a database after the company met
them at conferences, seminars, and trade shows. Before any meeting, the
team should spend time understanding their opinions on the market and
product space (if not, don’t use the meetings in this phase to get up to speed;
do the homework first).
Before contacting analysts and influencers, be sure to understand what
companies and industries their firms cover and what particular area or
companies the individual analysts cover. (There’s nothing worse than seeing
the wrong person or even the wrong company. It tells everyone that nobody
did their homework.) Develop a short script explaining why they should
meet. Understand what they cover and explain why the new company will
shake up their market and why the product and company are important. With
this accomplished, the “what’s in it for them” is obvious; they won’t want to
miss an influential and important company. (They’ll almost certainly also try
to sell their consulting services, which at least theoretically have no bearing
on their opinion about the new client’s product.) Make sure to reference early
customers and the problem/pain points that the product solves for them.
When they agree to meet, ask how much time they’ll allocate, what
presentation format they like (formal slides, demo, whiteboard talk, etc.) and
whether the presentation should focus on technology, markets, customers,
problems, or all the above.
Each analyst organization or influencer has a view
of the market or products it covers.
 
Assemble the presentation, keeping in mind this isn’t a sales pitch.
Focus on market and product positioning as well as details of product
features. The objective is to validate the product and company positions and,
wherever possible, to influence analysts’ thinking, not to sell them. Each
analyst organization or influencer has a view of the market or products it
covers—understand that view upfront (know it well enough to draw it on the
board). If creating a new market, get the slides describing its view of the
adjacent markets it will affect.
Meeting an industry influencer may require the same formal preparation
as meeting an analyst, or it may be a lunch at a nearby pub. Do the homework
to understand how the influencers acquire and disseminate information
upfront, and adjust presentation length and style accordingly.
When meeting influencers and analysts, remember that the goal is to
gather feedback (and hope for wild enthusiasm). Also use the interaction to
gather intelligence about the marketplace. Make a mental checklist of critical
learning objectives. For example:
What other companies are doing anything similar?
How does the new company’s vision fit with market needs?
With customer needs?
How can the company best position its product, its place in the market,
and the company itself?
Is the product pricing right?
How does it compare with competitors’ pricing?
The analysts can often clarify who in a company the sale should be
made to and the kinds of obstacles that will be faced. With feedback from
analysts and influencers as well several real customers, continue to the next
and final phase of customer validation.
Checklist 40: Validate Positioning
Goal:
 Validate product and company positioning, and product features
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
  
Meetings arranged with key analysts, industry influencers
     
  Targets tracked and monitored since Customer Discovery
     
  Analysts’ reports, press clippings, websites, etc., researched
     
  Script developed
  
Analyst presentation assembled
     
  Market and product positioning
     
  Product feature details
  
Report card for gathering intelligence, tracking feedback
Exit criteria
:
     
  Detailed feedback about the marketplace and product from key analysts
and influencers

CHAPTER 11
Customer Validation, Phase Four: The
Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
T
HIS IS THE MOST CRITICAL, MOST GUT-WRENCHING
 phase of customer
validation: honestly determining whether there’s a scalable, profitable
business model ahead. Is the company ready to go forward to the customer
creation step, when millions of dollars are often spent to fuel rapid customer
growth? This step literally “calls the question” about the company’s future
directions. It’s time to study all the test results, all the customer learning and
all the insights you’ve had from the facts you’ve gathered. Its time to see if
the company is ready to start spending money to scale, and that the result will
be a great, profitable company.
There are three steps to answering the crucial “pivot or proceed” question:
Assemble and review all key discovery and validation findings
Review the business model hypotheses and their interactions with one
another
Focus on the “metrics that matter” in the financial model
Pivot or Proceed: Assemble Data Findings
By this point, the team has assembled a massive amount of hard data:
industry research, customer segments, customer feedback, marketing
program results, channel and cost input and much more. The data needs to be
verified, with any gaps, discrepancies, or anomalies filled in along the way. A
few examples:
The company needs 10,000 customers in order to be profitable, but the
market isn’t that large
Customer acquisition or channel costs are too high, rendering the
company unprofitable
The sales roadmap is too long and complex, making the cost of sales
way too high
Despite best efforts, referrals just aren’t delivering additional customers
These anomalies are relatively easy to spot when all the data is collected
in one room. They often call for further customer, channel, or product
development discussions. At times, they drive a business model pivot.
The best way to “translate” piles of data, is to make
it as visual as possible.
 
Build a War Room
The best way to “translate” piles of data, reports and questionnaires is to
make it as visual as possible. For best results, lock the founding team in a
room for a day or two to walk step by step through each hypothesis. Cover
one wall with a blown up “final” business model canvas. Cover the other wall
with the hypotheses themselves, sorted to keep the pieces of each hypothesis
together (remember, many hypotheses have multiple parts). Use another wall
for supporting diagrams, and allow space for 
the most recent canvas and
perhaps one or two earlier iterations. Leave a large whiteboard available for
keeping score of questions and changes and for the key “metrics that matter”
numbers that emerge (discussed in detail in 
Step 3
). While not every diagram
is appropriate for your startup, review:
a 
work-flow map
 of the prototypical customer that diagrams how
customers do their jobs or live their lives both with and without the new
product
an 
organizational/influence map
 showing whom consumers or
businesspeople interact with, how often, and how those people influence
buying decisions.
customer archetypes:
 how they earn and spend their money and use their
time
a market map
 showing where your customers will come from
a channel or sales roadmap
 diagramming how sales will happen
a fully updated business model canvas
 (along with a few earlier
versions)
Review the Data
The most important hard data to review includes:
customer feedback, particularly from sales report cards evaluating
customer enthusiasm for the product and its potential sales revenue over
time
market size and market share estimates
channel feedback and revenue potential summaries
pricing, customer acquisition costs, and any major product cost changes
detailed information about the industry, the customers, and their
behavior
competitive product and pricing information
results of your web “get, keep and grow” tests
details of your customer acquisition costs and viral coefficient and the
latest stats on page views per visit, visit frequency, user growth, and
retention optimization
user-testing results, showing the rate of improvement for activation,
conversion, retention and growth activities
The team, often including investors, should review all the materials to
ensure that all the learning from discovery and validation has been integrated
into the latest versions of the hypothesis documents and into an updated
version of the business model canvas that will be discussed in the next step.
The key activity at this stage is to look at the intersections of, or interactions
among, the business model components, since no doubt many components
have changed along the way. The process is a healthy one, and the results
fuel the next steps of the pivot-or-proceed process.
Look at the intersections of, or interactions among
the business model components.
 
The Business Model Checklist (
Figure 11.2
) gives you and your
management team the questions you should be asking and worrying about.
Print them out. Keep them handy. And worry “Am I going to bet my
company that I got them right?”
Checklist 41: Assemble Data
Goal:
 Assemble all data, reports, questionnaires, map, diagrams, etc., for full
review
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
     
  Workflow map of the prototypical customer
     
  An organizational/influence map
     
  Customer archetypes
     
  Fully updated business model diagram (plus a few prior versions)
     
  Customer feedback from sales report cards
     
  Market size and market share estimates
     
  Channel feedback and revenue potential summaries
     
  Pricing, customer acquisition costs, and any major product cost changes
     
  Detailed information about the industry, customers and their behavior
     
  Competitive product and pricing information
Exit criteria:
     
  All key feedback, hard data, diagrams and the most recent business
model canvas assembled for review
     
  Learning from Discovery and Validation incorporated into latest
versions of the hypotheses documents and updated Business Model
Canvas
     
  Intersections of/interactions among business model components
reviewed
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Pivot or Proceed: Validate Your Business Model
It’s been a long road but you’ve converted most of your business model
hypotheses from customer discovery into facts. You’ve done so by extensive
testing through face-to-face customer interactions. So, if the customer-
relationships hypothesis said one of every five acquired customers will
activate and pay for the service or app, this actually happened in validation,
with hundreds if not thousands of customers. Or you’ve proven that people
return to the product or app three times a week for an average of 20 minutes
per visit or spend $100 a month visiting once.

Review Business Model Hypotheses
 (Figure 11.1)
The team should assemble data collected in the last phase in its “war
room” use the checklist to walk through the business model hypotheses, box
by box, and ascertain that there are factual, definitive answers to at least
every question on the checklist.
In this final phase of customer validation the company asks itself the
same questions it asked in Phase 4 of customer discovery. But at this point, it
should have much more quantitative, irrefutable proof of the answers, since
you’ve spoken to far more customers and conducted many more tests.
 Web/mobile startups have a unique set of business model hypotheses
that they need to validate, particularly in the “Get/Keep/Grow” Customer
Relationships area. These questions include:
Has the company proven it can acquire and activate a steadily-increasing
number of customers at a cost in line with the cost structure?
Are the customers being acquired demonstrating that they will spend
and “stick” with the company at rates that will deliver the revenue plan?
And are customers referring other good quality customers in sufficient
numbers to deliver these often-free new customers, reducing the average
acquisition cost?
In multi-sided markets, are customers visiting often enough,
participating actively enough, and staying active long enough to help the
company generate the revenues it needs to succeed?
The Business Model Canvas as a Scorecard
Hopefully you’ve been taking regular snapshots of your business model
canvas – either week-by-week snapshots, or at least at each major pivot. If
you’ve done it this way you now essentially have a film strip of the
entrepreneurial process.
As you can see from 
Figure 11.1
, each stage of discovery and validation
refined the canvas. Experiments were run, learning caused iterations and a
few pivots, and all were documented in a new canvas (
reread
 for tips).
Now that you have your canvases up on the wall use them as a point of
discussion.
The answers to “Is this a business?” can be found in
the results of the multitude of tests you’ve
conducted throughout the validation process.
 
The answers to “Is this a business?” can be found in the results of the
multitude of tests you’ve conducted throughout the validation process. As is
often the case, when the results aren’t convincing enough, or when they don’t
deliver the traffic or financial targets of the business model, it’s time to iterate
or pivot, and retest to see if the new approach improves the results. After all,
the company will very shortly be spending millions of dollars in the customer
creation phase, where results are expected to be far more predictable, and
much more is at risk. While this may seem ambitious and unreasonable, the
closer a company is to this “fact-based plan,” the greater its chances for
business and fund-raising success.

Business Model Checklist
 (Figure 11.2)
Checklist 42: Validate Business Model
Goal:
 Use facts gathered to validate the business model
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
  
Business Model Checklist
     
  Value Proposition
     
  Customer Segments
     
  Value Proposition 2: Market Type
     
  Channels
     
  Customer Relationships
     
  Cost Structure
     
  Revenue Stream
Exit criteria:
     
  Ensure all business model hypotheses have been converted into facts
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Pivot or Proceed: Validate the Financial Model
This step answers one key question: do all the tests point to a scalable, sizable
business? And can it happen before the company runs out of money?
In this step, you’ll figure out whether you have a potentially thriving
business, a hobby, or a tax loss.
Answering the question doesn’t require pounds of Excel spreadsheets or
50-item budgets. It relies more on the facts you’ve developed by testing your
original hypotheses with the only people who have the answers, your
customers, and with a short list of numbers, the 
metrics that matter
.
A mere handful of numbers define the difference
between a scalable, profitable business and a
failure.
 
A mere handful of numbers define the difference between a scalable,
profitable business and a failure. Successful entrepreneurs will be able to
recite, adjust, and recompute this handful or so of key numbers about
customers, product costs, and revenue growth while they sleep. Meanwhile,
they’re always focused on the two metrics that matter most: how many
months’ worth of cash remain in the bank? And how fast are we burning
through what’s left?
We guarantee that this different approach to finance will get you thrown
out of just about every business school in the country, but it’s all that’s
needed at this stage to determine whether your business model passes the
validation test and is ready to move on from validation to scale in customer
creation.
Metrics that Matter
Since page 1 of this book you’ve been using the business model canvas to
organize your testing. In this section we’re going to use the canvas to
organize your financial model. This is a radically different approach
compared to more typical use of 5-year revenue forecast spreadsheets. Think
of it as bringing your “report card” home to Mom and Dad—hopefully, a
report card full of A’s and A+’s, since B and C responses do not a great
company make. Some elements of the business model represent revenue or
costs, while others fuel growth. Physical and web/mobile channel costs vary
widely, as do rates of sale and growth, so one last time we’ll examine the
metrics three different ways:
In a physical channel, less than a dozen numbers usually tell the entire story:
Value proposition:
 What are product cost, market size, attainable market
share, and customer impact of network effects?
Customer Relationships:
 What are customer acquisition costs, prospect
conversion rates, customer lifetime value, and customer switching costs
that the company may have to pay?
Market Type:
 As discussed in 
Chapter 1
, different market types drive
different revenue curves to consider in longer-term revenue predictions
Cost Structure:
 What are the basic operating costs of the business?
Channel:
 What are the costs of selling through the channel? Channel
margin, promotion, shelf-space charges?
Revenue Streams:
 What are the average selling price, total achievable
revenue, and number of customers a year?
Burn Rate
 (derived from the above): How much cash is the company
“burning” (spending) a month? When will the company run out of cash?
There’s no precise formula for what a burn rate should be, but since it’s
the issue over which boards most often fire their founders, the founders
and investors must agree on what the burn rate should be and how many
more pivots the startup can afford in its search for the scalable,
profitable business model
 In the web/mobile channel, less than a dozen numbers tell the entire
story:
Value proposition:
 What is the estimated per-user cost of a user, and are
there any incremental costs when one’s added. Estimate the market size,
attainable market share, and the customer impact of referrals or network
effects
Customer Relationships:
 What are customer acquisition costs, prospect
conversion and retention rates, and how many new customers or users
will your current customers get you virally, for free?
Market Type:
 As discussed in 
Chapter 1
, different market types drive
different revenue curves to consider in longer-term revenue predictions
Cost Structure:
 What are the basic operating costs of the business? (Be
sure not to mingle or double-count these costs with your value
proposition costs)
Channel:
 What are the costs of selling through the channel: payments to
app stores, marketplace sites like 
Amazon.com
, or related sites referring
customers to you?
Revenue Streams:
 What are the average selling price, total achievable
revenue, and number of customers a year, and how long or how often
will customers spend?
Burn Rate
 (derived from the above): How much cash is the company
“burning” (spending) a month? When will the company run out of cash?
A Few Words about Burn Rate
Venture capitalist Fred Wilson suggests some burn-rate guidelines for
venture funded web/mobile businesses that may be helpful to entrepreneurs
of all stripes. Wilson’s advice looks at burn rate based on the company’s
growth stage.
Customer discovery,
 which he calls the “building product” stage, should
keep the burn rate between $50,000 and $75,000 a month, which should
fund a team of three or four engineers building the MVP as well as the
founding team, rent, operating costs and the like
Customer validation,
 Wilson’s “building usage” stage, shouldn’t exceed
a burn rate of $100,000 a month. This stage begins when product/market
fit is achieved and fuels the “get customers” and MVP iteration
discussed in this chapter
Customer creation,
 Wilson’s “building the business” stage, should
ideally hold the burn rate to $250,000 a month as the company builds a
team, expands marketing activities, and starts generating material
revenues
These are guidelines, and there are zillions of exceptions.
Assemble all your test results to provide a forecast for the coming year,
which begins on Day One of Step 3 of Customer Development, the customer
creation process.
We doubt there have been many startups where the year-one financial
results of customer creation matched the “metrics that matter.” But any VC,
uncle or rich neighbor is going to want to know why you think an investment
in your startup will deliver startup-size returns. If at the end of this step the
numbers are ugly—yup, you guessed it—turn back to the beginning of
discovery, or at least customer validation, and start revising and retesting
your hypotheses.
Three things to consider before you dive into Metrics That Matter:
Use the time frames that make the most sense for your startup.
Generally, the longer the physical-channel sales cycle (think enterprise
software), the longer the “space” between calculations should be. Here
we used a quarter-by-quarter forecast
An analysis like this can—and should—often stop the pivot–or-proceed
process in its tracks if the computation forecasts that the company will
either run out of money within the year or won’t be able to raise enough
funds to survive the first year of customer creation
Don’t be in a hurry at this critical step. As an entrepreneur, if you take a
pile of money to move forward here and fail, it will at least cost you a
significant portion of your founders’ equity, and it will often cost you
your job
Metrics that Matter Scenarios
Metrics matters are a radically new approach to startup math. They’re best
illustrated by example. The spreadsheet scenario on the following pages
illustrates how you can use “Metrics that Matter” to evaluate your business if
you are selling a web/moile product in the web/mobile channel or in a
multisided web/mobile market.
Metrics that Matter: Example 1
Expense Reporter Sold via Web/mobile Channels
 Let’s take a look at 
Table 11.1
, another $30 retail product, downloadable
XpensePro software, sold through the web/mobile channels only.
“Metrics That Matter”: Web/Mobile Sales Model
 (Table 11.1)
Note: the leftmost numbers refer to commentary in descriptive text that
follows.
In this scenario, our hypothetical company is selling XpensePro only as
a web or mobile app download directly from its website and via app stores.
As in the previous example, things are factored into the numbers above:
Product-development cost is heavy at first and then declines.
Incremental product unit costs are practically zero, since the product is a
download
Revenue never scales dramatically, since the market type is “re-
segmenting/niche market,” but the year-to-year revenue increases are
significant enough to promise downstream success
This angel-funded business starts with $300,000 cash remaining. More
money will be hard to get
What Metrics Matter?
There are five metrics that matter in this spreadsheet:
     •   Revenue comes from three channels
          
   Direct revenue from web sales, net of acquisition cost
          
   Direct mobile sales revenues, after subtracting referral incentives
          
   Revenue from the appstore channel, after subtracting channel fees
and marketing costs
     •   Cash burned or made during the period
     •   Cash remaining at the end of the quarter
Because the business is operating in three distinct channels, each of
which operates differently, it takes 17 different numbers to create the above
five metrics, but the board just needs to focus on five rather than 17. If one’s
ever out of whack or way off budget, drill down into the supporting details
numbers that make that number up: unit sales, gross direct revenue, cost of
customers or sales, and net revenue from the channel.
Following the left-hand column of the spreadsheet, let’s explore the origin of
each number and its source:
Web Sales:
1.
   Direct web unit sales:
 How many web apps are downloaded from the
company’s site. Customers are unlikely to make multiple purchases
within a year.
2.
   Gross direct revenue:
 Multiply the number of units (No. 1) by the
average selling price of $30.
3.
   (Less) customer acquisition cost:
 The cost to make a sale over the web
On average, $6 worth of AdWords, incentives, e-mail and the like to
acquire one customer. Multiply $6 by the number of solid units (No. 1).
4.
   Net web revenue total:
 Subtract the customer acquisition cost (No. 3)
from the gross direct revenue from website sales (No. 2).
5.
   Direct mobile unit sales:
 A few customers will find and download the
app’s mobile version at the company website (most will find it at the app
stores). Calculate the quarterly units using the process described in EZ
Gardner metric #1.
On the surface, this looks like a really lovely
business.
 
6.
   Gross revenue/direct mobile units:
 Multiply the number of mobile units
sold directly to customers (No. 5) by $30, the average selling price.
7.
   (Less) referral incentive:
 The customer-relationships hypothesis
indicates that a third of the company’s direct sales will come from
referrals by happy customers encouraged by a $4 incentive. Take 1/3 of
the directsales web (No. 1) and mobile (No. 5) units and multiply by $4.
8.
   DIRECT mobile revenue total:
 How much cash winds up in the
company’s bank from this channel? Multiply units (No. 5) by
revenue/unit (No. 6) and then subtract the referral incentive (No. 7) to
find the answer.
9.
   CHANNEL app-store sales (units):
 Calculate units using the channel
method outlined in EZ Gardner unit sales #3.
10.
  CHANNEL gross revenue:
 multiply the channel units sold (No. 9) by
the retail price of $30.
11.
  (Less) market/app-store 30% fee:
 Every download sold will cost the
company an app store fee of 30 percent, or $9. Multiply units (No. 9) by
$9.00 and subtract it from channel revenue (No. 10).
12.
  TOTAL NET APPSTORE revenue:
 Subtract the app-store fee (No.
11) from channel revenue (No. 10) to find the amount of cash that will
wind up in the company’s bank from app-store sales.
13.
  TOTAL NET revenue (all channels):
 Add three revenue numbers—
No. 4 (direct web revenue), No. 8 (direct mobile revenue), and No. 12
(net channel revenue)—to compute the company’s net sales.
14.
  (Less) product/product-development costs:
 What does it cost to build
and make the product? Compute your ongoing product development
costs, plus download and bandwidth charges. There’s no physical cost of
the product itself.
15.
  (Less) current operating costs:
 Compute the costs of turning on the
lights at the company every day, as in Example 1, line 9.
16.
  CASH BURN FOR PERIOD:
 Did we make or lose money this quarter?
How much? Follow the process for calculating cash burn outlined in
Spreadsheet 1, line 10.
17.
  CASH REMAINING:
 Follow the process in Spreadsheet 1, No. 11.
If These Were Your Numbers, What’s a Founder to
Do?
On the surface, this looks like a really lovely business. It plans to generate
$746,000 in positive cash flow in its first year of customer creation, and to
roughly triple that cashflow in its second year. But can a business doing $2.5-
million in revenue after four years really make investors and founders happy?
That’s not for us to decide, and the numbers don’t tell us whether they spent
$500,000 and a year—or $5,000,000 and five years—to get to the start of the
spreadsheet, so it’s hard to applaud or bash the outcome.
Seems like the next board meeting should pull out the latest business
model canvas and look for some game-changing growth opportunities, almost
no matter what. The company isn’t spending all that much money on product
development or staff costs (those numbers are relatively flat), and it’s almost
turning into a cash cow long before it should be turned out to pasture.
After all, almost any business that can get almost 100,000 new
customers in a year should be trying to figure out how to either add a zero to
that number in a year or two, or at least double it, perhaps, in the second year.
The company’s year two plan seems unambitious at first glance, even though
the profits double.
Meanwhile, on the downside:
The $4 incentive (No. 7) might deliver too few sales and need to be
beefed up, changing net revenues adversely
App-store (No.12) approval process could delay launch in the biggest
channel, hurting revenues
More staff (No. 15) might be needed for support, channel relations, or
who-knows-what
Mobile sales direct to consumers (No. 5) could be a total flop, hurting
that revenue
Even though the numbers look pretty good in the spreadsheet, hold the
high-fives and look at ways to improve them anyway. After all, they’re still
estimates based on customer validation proof—they’re not money in the bank
by any means. Review the “what’s a founder to do” section under
Spreadsheet 1 to explore ways to reduce the cash burn where it makes sense.
Hold all these thoughts—and others—for the final section of this phase, the
pivot-or-proceed discussion.

“Metrics That Matter”: Multi-sided/Ad-Supported Model
 (Table 11.2)
Note: the leftmost numbers refer to commentary in descriptive text that
follows.
Metrics that Matter: Example 2
A Multi-sided Market Example
Here’s a third way to look at a totally different business model 
for the exact
same product,
 XPensePro software. Let’s explore a multi-sided market,
where the product is identical but it’s 
absolutely free to users.
 Advertisers
eager to reach businesspeople with active expense accounts will pay to reach
the audience, and company revenues come from advertising and sales of e-
mail lists, the other “side” in this multi-sided market example.
A multi-sided market, where the product is
identical but it’s absolutely free to users.
 
In this scenario, our venture-backed multi-sided market company is
offering its products to users for free, provided that they agree to receive two
e-mails per week from advertisers. The product is a digital download, but
considerable resources are expended selling ads to the other side of the
market. (It’s interesting to note how dissimilar these metrics that matter are
when compared with the other two business models.) As in the previous
example, several things are factored into the numbers above:
Our VC-backed example has a $10-million war chest
Product-development cost is heavy at first and then declines
Product costs are practically zero, since the “product” is a download.
Revenue never scales dramatically, since the market type is “re-
segmenting/niche market,” but the year-to-year revenue increases are
significant enough to promise downstream success
Much of the cost of advertising and e-mail sales is factored into the
revenue numbers, which are net of network or rep commission costs
It still costs real money to acquire users through PR, e-mail, and other
activities, even for a free product. As the company iterates and becomes
smarter, its acquisition cost declines in the second year
Metrics that Matter/Add It All Up
There are 16 “metrics that matter” in this spreadsheet because we need to
monitor revenue and costs on both sides of the multi-sided market. (The
company pivoted and eliminated cash sales of its product in this scenario.)
Following the left-hand column of the spreadsheet, let’s explore the origin of
each number as well as its source a little more closely:
1.
   New activated users :
 How many people will download the free app and
begin actively using it. 
Active
 is defined as generating at least the average
number of page views (No. 4).
2.
   New user acquisition cost @ $3:
 On average, the customer acquisition
costs to generate one active user (No. 1). Some will come virally for free,
others will cost $6 or more.
3.
   Total active users:
 Average active monthly users during the quarter.
4.
   Average page views per user per quarter:
 Actual user clicks on the site
will generate this number by dividing the number of active users (No. 3)
into total page views (No. 5). This is an important measure of the
business health and growth.
5.
   Total page views per quarter:
 Multiply the total users (No. 3) by the
average page views per user (No. 4) to begin to understand available
advertising-sales opportunities for the period.
6.
   Less attrition:
 Lots of users abandon things they download but don’t
have to pay for, so watching this number (generated by instrumentation)
is important. We’ve defined attrition as a user who hasn’t generated a
page view a week for two consecutive months.
7.
   TOTAL CPMs to sell:
 subtract attrition (No. 6) from total page views
(No. 5) and divide by 1,000 for the “salable CPMs” needed (ad sales are
based on cost per thousand, or CPM). The +/- 7% average gets worse in
year two as more competitors emerge.
8.
   Average CPM x 4 ads/page:
 Competitive analysis and “buy-side”
customer validation research will determine what CPM advertisers are
willing to pay to reach this audience. Assuming four ads on each page,
multiply the average CPM by 4 to compute the average revenue per 1,000
pages viewed. In this example, we’ve already deducted the cost of sales,
whether it’s commissions for sales reps or network ad sales. 
The CPM
increases (Q3-4) as the site gets more attractive to advertisers.
9.
   TOTAL ADVERTISING REVENUE:
 multiply the number of M’s (No.
7) or total CPMs available for sale by the 4x average CPM (No. 8) to
compute advertising revenue. The figure grows dramatically as the
number of users and their site traffic rise.
The business model looks so strong and
compelling...
 
10.
  E-mail-list rental revenue:
 An estimate based on competitive analysis
and buy-side customer validation research. This starts out small and at
very low rates (per thousand) and, both CPM and volume build as the
audience becomes large enough to be attractive to advertisers.
11.
  TOTAL REVENUE:
 This ad-supported multi-sided marketer has only
two sources of revenue. Add the advertising revenue (No. 9) to the e-
mail-list rental revenue (No. 10).
12.
  (Less) user acquisition cost:
 Subtract the number from Line 2 here.
13.
  (Less) product/product-development cost:
 Computed from customer
validation and cost structure boxes of the business model. While this
declines later in the first year as the initial product matures, the budget
increases in the second year to add features that will help the company
continue attracting new customers.
14.
  (Less) current operating costs:
 Compute the costs of turning on the
lights at the company every day, as the EZ Gardner example, line 9.
15.
  CASH BURN per period:
 Subtract the three cost centers (Nos. 12, 13
and 14) from the total revenue (No. 11) to compute the quarterly cash
burn.
16.
  Cash remaining/end of quarter:
 Subtract the cash burned (or collected)
during the quarter from the checkbook balance as of the first day of the
quarter to calculate the cash remaining at quarter’s end. This number
becomes attractive rather quickly in this model.
If These Were Your Numbers, What’s a founder to
do?
There’s an old rule in startups that a spreadsheet is worth 48.5x the paper it’s
printed on. But if this spreadsheet set of “metrics that matter,” is anywhere
close to accurate, our founders and investors at Expensereporter may indeed
have a homerun on their hands.
In this case, the business model looks so strong and compelling that the
founders have two clear priorities. Job #1 is to play strong defense, and make
certain that they deliver on all the key numbers in the plan (which, as you
recall, are already turned into immutable facts through two grueling stages of
Customer Development). That process starts with a step-by-step revalidation
of every single number on the page, to be sure there are no mistakes. Next
step: a detailed “worst case” analysis.
As every business should, the founding team here should expand this
one set of metrics into three: a worst case and a high case, on both sides of
the hypothetical set of metrics shown here. And since the business is totally
dependent on advertising revenue, they should quickly return to their channel
validation efforts and probe further to make sure they’re as valid as everyone
believes. They should also focus on reducing user attrition.
With all that accomplished, review the analyses from Spreadsheets 1 and
2 about reducing costs and optimizing activation and revenue. Then, just in
case, put a case of great French Champagne in the office fridge!
Some Final Thoughts About the Financial Model
Market Type Affects Revenue Streams.
 Each of the four market types has a
distinctive sales-growth curve shaped by the degree of difficulty involved in
transitioning from sales to the earlyvangelists to sales to mainstream
customers. Obviously in new markets, it typically takes considerable time for
the product to catch on beyond earlyvangelists, who aren’t typically high-
volume mainstream buyers. So success with early sales doesn’t guarantee fast
revenue scaling.
The sales-growth curves for a new market and an existing market
graphically illustrate the difference. Even after finding and successfully
selling to earlyvangelists, the rate of sales differs in later years because of the
different adoption rates of mainstream customers.
Revenue Growth in New and Existing Markets
 (Figure 11.3)
Estimating revenue in an existing market is relatively simple: Look at
the incumbents and calculate the increasing percentage of market share the
startup will grab each year.
Estimating a new market’s size might seem impossible, since it doesn’t
exist yet. What to do? Estimate the opportunity based on proxies and adjacent
markets. See if there are any comparable companies. Have others grown as
fast as the estimate? Why will this startup perform similarly?
Revenue Growth in a Resegmented Market
 (Figure 11.4)
The sales curve in a re-segmented market is somewhat easier to
estimate. It’s generally similar to that of a new market in that it takes time to
gather a head of steam. There are three steps to assessing a re-segmented
market: assess the size of the existing market, figure out how large your
startup’s “segment” is, and calculate the adoption rate, or the time it will take
for that segment to recognize the new product as the solution of choice.
Count only the segment that will switch, and beware of long-term contracts,
service contracts, and “sunk costs” such as training and installation, all of
which are often “lock-ins” or hidden barriers to switching.
Revenue growth curves depend on Market Type!
 
Demand Curve Affects Revenue:
 The “demand curve” seeks the optimum
intersection between sales volume and net profit. For example, if a physical
product is most efficiently manufactured in lot sizes of 5,000, can that
inventory be sold in a reasonable time when current unit sales are 50 a
month? A startup selling new electric cars for $29,000 will generate massive
demand. But if they cost $45,000 to manufacture, the company will go
bankrupt very quickly. Consider:
the actual price per unit, for multiples, and for subscriptions
how pricing can be used to attract more users
how pricing can create larger or more frequent purchases by the same
user; volume discounts, free shipping, loyalty points and similar pricing
mechanisms are used for what’s typically called “market basket”
optimization
how pricing can be used to enhance profitability or volume
how the company can forward-price the product to intersect the
economies-of-scale curve (as in, “If we could build 10,000 at a time, our
production cost drops 32 percent”)
When to Bring in the Accountants
Eventually, prospective investors, banks, and others will want to see the
traditional P&L, forecast, and more, and that’s fine. Once the metrics that
matter are firmly understood to make sound business sense 
and are validated,
almost any finance type (or high school math student) can convert them into a
VC-ready multiyear P&L spreadsheet, balance sheet, and cash-flow statement
(the “usual stuff” everyone is accustomed to seeing) with ease.
On rare and welcome occasions, metrics that matter actually don’t
matter at all. If customer acquisition and activation are proceeding at warp
speed month after month or the economy is hot, investors may ignore most of
the other metrics, throw caution to the wind, and vote to scale the company
rapidly. This seldom happens, but we hope it happens to you. It can happen
more often in frothy vertical markets, as it did in social networking and other
multi-sided markets or strong IPO markets,. But nine times out of 10, the
metrics that matter do matter quite a bit when it comes time to spend serious
investor dollars.
Adding it all up
This phase is a vital make-or-break analysis of how well the business model
should work. But remember that the numbers are still only educated guesses,
validated—we hope—through extensive customer discovery and validation
effort with scores if not hundreds of customers.
Checklist 43: Validate Financial Model
Goal:
 Ensure the startup can become a profitable, scalable business before it
runs out of money
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
  
Value Proposition
     
  Product cost
     
  Market size
     
  Attainable market share
     
  Customer impact of network effects
  
Customer Relationships
     
  Customer acquisition costs
     
  Prospect conversion rates
     
  Customer Lifetime Value
     
  Customer switching costs
  
Market Type considerations
  
Basic operating costs
Channel costs
     
  Channel margin, promotion and shelf space fees
  
Revenue streams
     
  Average selling price
     
  Total achievable revenue
     
  Number of customers/year
  
Cash balance
  
Do the Math
Exit criteria:
     
  A full financial picture of the company’s ability to succeed
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Pivot or Proceed: 
Re
-Validate the Business Model
It’s the perfect time to take one last look at the key business model
components, for several reasons. In a few days, a great deal will change if the
vote is “go forward” to the customer creation step. Customer creation is a
radically different stage during which the company suddenly shifts from
“searching for a business model” to “executing one.” It’s no longer
celebrating mistakes and wrong turns. It shifts full-throttle into “execute”
mode, with revenue targets and timetables to hit, product and plans to deliver,
and more granular and precise accountability to investors and board
members.
The company is about to spend a great deal of money far faster, and
irrevocably, as it works ambitiously to deliver its chosen business model.
With that comes the typical “career risk” for founders, which always prompts
investors to ask if the seemingly manic “founder type” should be replaced by
a “seasoned” leader with proven execution skills. Massive amounts of money
are about to be spent on a single, focused bet that the business model, as
developed, has a high likelihood of scaling to profit and success. Boards and
investors are suddenly less forgiving and typically far less welcoming of
reports like “That idea was wrong” and “That didn’t work as we hoped” than
they were during the earlier “search” phases.
Long story short, it’s time to revisit the core business model elements
one last time.
Best Bets
You’re almost done. You’ve run the numbers in the last section and are still
feeling like your business is a winner. But have you picked the best value
proposition? Is your product delivery schedule right? Are you confident
you’ve gotten the optimum revenue model and costs? And have you missed
any best moves on the overall business model? Here are a few last things to
check.
Make Sure the Value Proposition is Right
After going through the “metrics that matter” in the last section, are you
absolutely convinced you have the right value proposition? You’re about to
live with it for awhile. If you don’t feel that it’s going to win the marketplace
now, it doesn’t get better over time. It may be time to reconfigure, repackage
or unbundle the product. This requires a loop all the way back to customer
discovery. Once there, use the core technology to develop another product,
configuration, distribution method or price and then modify product
presentations and return to Phase 3 (product presentation) and do it again.
Yes, it hurts, but it hurts far less than failure.
Make Sure the Product Delivery is Right
Even with selling success, check the product delivery timing with the
product-development team. Schedules inevitably change, seldom for the
better. Can the company still deliver what was just sold and do so as
promised, or was the sale actually vaporware? If vaporware, at best the
company secured a few pilot projects. Continuing to sell as if nothing has
changed is a bad idea. As schedules slip, hard-won earlyvangelists weaken,
and references evaporate quickly. The good news is, if this happens (it
happens often), the situation is still recoverable. There aren’t many people to
fire, and the burn rate is low. (As discussed earlier, it’s always important to
have enough cash to get this phase wrong at least once.) The solution is to
shut down any additional selling for a while, admit mistakes, and turn pilot
projects into something useful—first for the customer and then as a
marketable product.
Make Sure the Revenue is High and Costs are Low
There’s nothing worse than leaving money on the table or spending more
than you needed to. The best way to answer these questions and more is to
“walk” slowly through the business model one more time.
Start with the value proposition. Are there too many features or not
enough variety? Would a lower price sell far more units or sell the same
number at a lower acquisition cost? What if the product were free, or
free to those bringing three or five or 10 other customers along?
In the customer-relationships hypothesis, is there rock-solid confidence
in the plan, or might a freemium or multi-sided alternative deliver
bolder, faster growth? Will that costly AdWords effort deliver the
planned result?
Can a different channel deliver fewer sales and more profit?
Will partners deliver the revenue growth you need and expect?
Are there higher level business model patterns you may have missed?
Make Sure Your Business Model is Right
Grab a fresh business model canvas and a pack of Post-it notes. Explore
alternatives seriously. The team is about to put a big pile of chips, probably
millions, on “red” or “black,” as in “pass” or “fail.” Is everyone confident the
choice is the right?
Changing direction at this juncture is a bold move indeed. It’s not what
the investors expected, especially after a long, grueling process of customer
discovery and validation. Then again, bold moves are the work of great
entrepreneurs. And even though a pivot at this point leads to more customer
validation and more time, it’s far better to pivot now than to forge ahead at
full speed and full spend if it’s possible that there’s a better idea out there
somewhere.
Further validate the business model, not just looking for enhancements
in revenue opportunity and places to reduce cost, but looking for “game
changers.” Can you change a product sold by features into a branded-
experience that becomes a “got-to-have-it” fashion? Can you change a
revenue model from a unit sale into a network effects model? Look for the
non-obvious business patterns. Even if the team is certain the current model
is the best way forward, now’s the time to bring in your advisory board and
have them throw stones (painful as it is) at your canvas. Do they see a huge
move that you missed? No doubt the financial model review just completed
raised at least a handful of questions and perhaps pointed to some
opportunities. Revisit the business model checklist questions. Are any of the
answers different? Does the team want to have more money in the bank or
spend less? Where can savings be effected or additional dollars efficiently put
to good?
If the team has turned over every possibility in its review, looking both
at radical changes and modest improvements in the business model, and
confidence still carries the day, it’s time to move on to the ultimate question:
pivot or proceed?
Checklist 44: Re-Validate The Business Model
Goal:
 Further validate the business model
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed? Revalidate the Financial Model
  
Business Model Canvas revisited
  
Business Model Checklist revisited
     
  Value Proposition
     
  Customer Segments
     
  Value Proposition 2: Market Type
     
  Channels
     
  Customer Relationships
     
  Cost Structure
     
  Revenue Stream
Exit criteria
:
     
  Determine if the company is making the best bet possible
     
  Assess if revenue is as high and costs as low as they can realistically be
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
The Toughest Startup Question: Pivot or Proceed?
This is the moment of truth when the team and the investors will vote on
whether to begin spending massive amounts of money to execute the business
model. To vote honestly, the team needs to take a hard, honest look at the
pivot-or-proceed analyses developed in this phase.
As grueling as the customer validation process is, it’s quite likely that
the company will require another turn of the wheel before everyone can
enthusiastically vote to move forward. Don’t despair—this need to pivot
arises almost every time, and often calls for a return all the way to customer
discovery.
Hubris
 is the evil twin of a passionate entrepreneur.
 
The alternative is even more painful. In the past, investors magically
assumed flawless execution and fired executives who failed. It’s time to
reflect, thinking seriously about the company’s genuine chances for scalable,
profitable success. It’s a hard decision, particularly for self-confident
entrepreneurs who pride themselves on their tenacity, and problem-solving
abilities. “I’m an entrepreneur. I make things happen against all odds” just
doesn’t cut it when staring at the hard facts and statistics. Don’t confuse
hubris with passion or facts.
Did validation really convert opinions to facts, or is everyone just
moving the goalposts to reach customer creation? The next step seriously
cranks up the company’s cash burn rate, sharply diminishing if not
extinguishing available cash or runway.
Did the product sell well and easily? Is it absolutely, unequivocally clear
that when more money is spent to acquire customers, they’ll arrive at a
steady, predictable, 
profitable pace? This question in particular probably
sends 90 percent of startups back into the depths of Customer Development
to refine and retest components of the business model.
If the “ramp” to more customers, revenue and profits isn’t proved to be
predictable in test results, it’s also a reason to pivot. Using everything you
learned in customer validation, go back to Phase 1 of this step (get ready to
sell) and try it again. Sorry. This isn’t easy to do.
If everything checks out (again, it seldom does the first time around), the
end of customer validation is a major milestone. Customer problems are
understood, a set of earlyvangelists has been found, and the company has
delivered a product its customers want to buy, developed a repeatable and
scalable sales process, and demonstrated a profitable business model.
Hopefully, all the learning is captured in writing and the business model
diagram is updated. Fund-raising, while never easy, will be far easier than at
this point than it was before.
When you’ve answered “yes” to that taxing list of questions, you
deserve a night off, if not a week. Congratulations! The company is prepared
to move full speed ahead to the customer creation process.
 What’s Next?
The first two steps of Customer Development are where entrepreneurs live or
die in the search for a repeatable and scalable business model. When a
company has successfully exited Customer Validation, there’s a library full
of business-building texts available to help execute the business model. So, at
least for now, if you’re eager to execute the next two steps—Customer
Creation and Company Building—return to the original Four Steps to the
Epiphany, or turn to a more targeted text for fine-tuned support.
Whatever you do next, the successful completion of Customer
Validation is a momentous step in the life of your startup. You have
completed an arduous, challenging journey. Our warmest, most sincere
congratulations. We look forward to learning about your success!
Checklist 45: Pivot or Proceed?
Goal:
 Decide whether to execute the business model
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
     
  Did the Validation effort really convert opinions to facts?
     
  Business model diagram is updated
     
  Did the product sell well and easily?
     
  Is it clear that customers will continue to arrive at a steady, predictable,
profitable pace?
     
  Repeatable and scalable sales process developed
     
  Product delivery timing checked
     
  Confirmation that company can deliver on what was sold, do as
promised
     
  Profitable business model demonstrated
     
  Move forward or pivot?
Exit criteria:
     
  An informed decision about whether to move forward
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
How To Build a Web Startup –
Lean LaunchPad Edition
If you’re an experienced coder and user interface designer you think nothing
is easier than diving into 
Ruby on Rails
, 
Node.js
 and 
Balsamiq
 and throwing
together a website. (Heck, in Silicon Valley even the waiters can do it.)
But for the rest of us mortals whose eyes glaze over at the buzzwords,
the questions are, “How do I get my great idea on the web? What are the
steps in building a website?” And the most important question is, “How do I
use the business model canvas and Customer Development to test whether
this is a real business?”
My first attempt at helping students answer these questions was by
putting together the 
Startup Tools Page
 at 
www.steveblank.com
. It’s a
compilation of available tools for startups. While it was a handy reference, it
still didn’t help the novice.
So below, I offer my next attempt.
How To Build a Web Startup – The Lean LaunchPad Edition
Here’s the step-by-step process we suggest our students use in our Lean
LaunchPad classes. All these steps are covered in Chapters 
3
,
4
 and 
5
.
1
. 
Set up the logistics to manage your team
2
. 
Craft company hypotheses
3
. 
Write a value proposition statement that other people understand
4
. 
Set up the Website Logistics
5
. 
Build a “low fidelity” web site
6
. 
Get customers to the site
7
. 
Add the backend code to make the site work
8
. 
Test the “problem” with customer data
9
. 
Test the “solution” by building the “high-fidelity” website
10
. 
Ask for money
(Use the 
Startup Tools
 page at 
www.steveblank.com
 as a resource for
tool choices.)
 
The tools listed in these Steps are examples. They are not recommended
or preferred, just representative of what’s available. New tools appear
daily. Do your homework. See 
www.steveblank.com
 for a list of the
latest tools.
 
Step 1: Set Up Team Logistics
Read 
Chapter 1
 - The Customer Development Manifesto
Set up a 
WordPress
 blog to document your Customer Development
progress
Use 
Skype
 or 
Google+ Hangouts
 for team conversations
Step 2. Craft Your Company Hypotheses
Write down your 9-
business model
 canvas hypothesis
List key features/
Minimal Viable product
 plan
Size the market
 opportunity. Use 
Google Trends
, 
Google Insights
, and
Facebook
 ads to evaluate the market growth potential. Use 
Crunchbase
to look at competitors
Calculate Total Available Market, and customer value
Pick market type (existing, new, resegmented)
Prepare weekly progress summary: business model canvas update +
weekly Customer Development summary (
described after Step 10
)
Step 3: Write a Unique Selling Proposition statement that other people
understand
If you can’t easily explain why you exist, none of the subsequent steps
matter. A good format is “We help X do Y by doing Z”
Once you have a statement in that format, find a few other people
(doesn’t matter if they’re your target market) and ask them if it makes
sense
If not, give them a longer explanation and ask them to summarize that
back to you. Other people are often better than you at crafting an
understandable Unique Selling Proposition.
Step 4: Website Logistics
Get a domain name for your company. To find an available domain
quickly, try 
Domize
 or 
Domainr
Then use 
godaddy
 or 
namecheap
 to register the name. (You may want to
register many different domains (different possible brand names, or
different misspellings and variations of a brand name)
Once you have a domain, set up 
Google Apps
 on that domain (for free!)
to host your company name, email, calendar, etc.
For coders:
 set up a web host
Use 
virtual private servers
 (VPS) like 
Slicehost
 or 
Linode
 (cheapest
plans ~$20/month, and you can run multiple apps and websites)
You can install 
Apache
 or 
Nginx
 with virtual hosting, and run several
sites plus other various tools of your choice (assuming you have the
technical skills of course) like a 
MySQL
 database
If you are actually coding a real app, use a 
“Platform As A Service”
(PAAS) like 
Heroku
, 
DotCloud
 or 
Amazon Web Services
 if your app
development stack fits their offerings
Customer Discovery for the Web
Step 5: Build a Low 
Fidelity
 Web Site
Depending on your product, this may be as simple as a splash page with:
your value proposition, benefits summary, and a call-to-action to learn
more, answer a short survey, or pre-order)
For surveys and pre-order forms, 
Wufoo
 and 
Google Forms
 can easily
be embedded within your site with minimal coding
For 
non-coders:
Make a quick prototype in PowerPoint, or
Use 
Unbounce
, 
Google Sites
, 
Weebly
, 
Godaddy
, 
WordPress
 or 
Yola
For surveys and pre-order forms, 
Wufoo
 and 
Google Forms
 can easily
be embedded within your site with minimal coding
For coders:
 build the User Interface
Pick a website 
wireframe prototyping tool
, (i.e. 
JustinMind
, 
Balsamiq
)
99 Designs
 is great to get “good enough” graphic design and web design
work for very cheap using a contest format. 
Themeforest
 has great
designs
Create wireframes and simulate your “Low Fidelity” website
Create a fake sign up/order form to test customer commitment.
Alternatively, create a 
“viral”
 landing page, with 
LaunchRock
 or
KickoffLabs
Embed a slideshow on your site with 
Slideshare
 or embed a video/tour
using 
Youtube
 or 
Vimeo
Do user interface testing with 
Usertesting
 or 
Userfy
Step 6: Customer Engagement
 (drive traffic to your preliminary website)
Start showing the site to potential customers, testing customer segment
and value proposition
Use Ads, textlinks or Google AdWords, 
Facebook ads
 and natural
search to drive people to your Minimally Viable web site
Use your network to find target customers – ask your contacts, “Do you
know someone with problem X? If so, can you forward this message on
to them?” and provide a 2-3 sentence description
For B2B products, 
Twitter
, 
Quora
, and industry mailing lists are a good
place to find target customers. Don’t spam these areas, but if you’re
already an active participant you can sprinkle in some references to your
site or you can ask a contact who is already an active participant to do
outreach for you
Use 
Mailchimp
, 
Postmark
 or 
Google Groups
 to send out emails and
create groups
Create online surveys with 
Wufoo
 or 
Zoomerang
Get feedback on your Minimum Viable Product (MVP) features and
User Interface
Step 7: Build a more complete solution
 (Connect the User Interface to
code)
Connect the UI to a 
web application framework
 (for example, 
Node.js
,
Rubyon Rails
, 
Django
, 
SproutCore
, 
jQuery
, 
Symfony
, 
Sencha
, etc.)
Step 8: Test the “Customer Problem” by collecting Customer Data
Use 
Web Analytics
 to track hits, time on site, source. For your initial
site, 
Google Analytics
 provides adequate information with the fastest
setup. Once you’ve moved beyond your initial MVP, you’ll want to
consider a more advanced analytic platform (
Kissmetrics
, 
Mixpanel
,
Kontagent
, etc.)
Create an account to measure user satisfaction (
GetSatisfaction
,
UserVoice
, etc.) from your product and get feedback and suggestions on
new features
Specific questions, such as “Is there anything preventing you from
signing up?” or “What else would you need to know to consider this
solution?” tend to yield richer customer feedback than generic feedback
requests
If possible, collect email addresses so that you have a way to contact
individuals for more in-depth conversations
Step 9: Test the “Customer Solution” by building a full featured High
Fidelity version of your website
Update the website with information learned in 
Steps 5-8
Remember that “High Fidelity” still does not mean “complete product.”
You need to look professional and credible, while building the smallest
possible product in order to continue to validate
Keep collecting customer analytics
Hearing “This is great, but when are you going to add X?” is your goal!
Step 10: Ask for money
Put a “pre-order” form in place (collecting billing information) even
before you’re ready to collect money or have a full product
When you’re ready to start charging – which is probably earlier than you
think – find a billing provider such as 
Recurly
, 
Chargify
, or 
PayPal
 to
collect fees and subscriptions
For all Steps:
Give your team a weekly Lessons Learned progress report.
     •  Start by putting up your business model canvas
     •  Changes from the prior week should be highlighted in red
     •  Lessons Learned. This informs the group of what you learned and
changed week by week – Slides should describe:
          1.  Here’s what we thought (going into the week)
          2.  Here’s what we found (Customer Discovery during the week)
          3.  Here’s what we’re going to do (for next week)
          4.  Emphasis should be on the discovery done for that weeks assigned
canvas component (channel, customer, revenue model) but
include other things you learned about the business model
The Startup Owner’s Manual for
Web/Mobile Channel Startups
Index
A
  |  
B
  |  
C
  |  
D
  |  
E
F
  |  
G
  |  
H
  |  
I
  |  
J
K
  |  
L
  |  
M
  |  
N
  |  
O
P
  |  
R
  |  
S
  |  
T
  |  
U
V
  |  
W
A
a/b testing
     
of contests,
     
as controlled,
     
to increase acquisition,
     
to increase user engagement,
     
of landing page,
     
as optimization tool,
acquisition
     
without activation
,
     
archetypes as guiding
,
     
business model as basis of,
     
cost of
,
     
defined
,
     
earned and paid tactics for,
     
metrics measuring successful,
     
optimizing,
     
pairing activation with,
     physical. 
see
 
“get” customers (physical)
     
ranking tactics for,
     
and retention rate by source,
     
re-validating rate of,
     
testing,
     
tools,
     
see also
 
“get” customers (web/mobile)
activation
     
acquisition as combined with,
     
acquisition without,
     
activities driving,
     
assessing ease of,
     
as choke point,
     
cohort analysis by date of,
     
defined
,
     
measuring rate of
,
     
optimizing,
     
plan components,
     
by referral,
     
testing
,
     
tools, cost,
     
tools off the website,
     
tools on the landing page,
     
velocity
,
     
see also
 
“get” customers
adoption
     
by earlyvangelists,
     
total cost of ownership/adoption (TCO),
advertising
     
forms of online,
     
optimizing,
     
as paid media source,
     
revenue, calculating,
     
validation with,
     
see also
 
multi-sided markets
advisory boards
,
affiliate marketing
,
affiliate revenue,
aggregators,
agile development
     
creates high-fidelity MVP,
     
low-fidelity MVP delivery with,
     
pairing customer development with,
analysts
,
analytics chief,
animation
,
App Store, Apple’s
,
Apple
,
attrition,
audience
     
distinct,
     
indistinct,
     
small
,
audits, company,
awareness
     
drivers of,
     
as first “get” customers stage
,
     
generation of web/mobile
,
B
back-end offers
,
bits,
bloggers, reaching out to,
“Blue Ocean Strategy” (Kim and Mauborgne)
,
board members
     
communication with,
     
customer development adoption by,
     
internal audit by,
     
startup metric tracking by,
bubble economies,
budget. 
see
 
cost
; 
spending
business model canvas
     briefs. 
see
 
hypotheses briefs
     
guides validation priorities,
     
hypotheses tests using,
     
overview of,
     
team review of
,
     
as validation scorecard,
     
weekly score keeping via,
Business Model Generation
 (Osterwalder)
,
business models
     
cloning existing,
     
customer discovery/validation tests,
     
customer-facing aspects of,
     
financing,
     
for multi-sided markets,
     
pivot-or-proceed review of
,
     
re-validating,
     
revenue forecasts to refine,
     validating
          
checklist for,
          
by team meeting,
          
with test sales,
business plan,
business-to-business sales
     
checkpoints for,
     
pricing,
buyable startups,
“buzz” creation
,
C
capital equipment,
cash burn
     
by customer development stage,
     
via premature scaling,
     
re-validation before,
     
validating rate of (physical),
channels, sales
     
data mining in,
     
for multi-sided markets
,
     
the phone as,
     
revenue as affected by
,
     
revenue sources within,
     
testing
,
     
validating (physical),
     
as validation priority,
     
validation speed as affected by,
     
see also
 
physical channels
; 
web/mobile channels
check-in calls, customer,
churn
,
clone market
     
company positioning for,
     
defined,
     
product positioning for,
cloned business models,
cohort analysis,
companies, large
     
entrepreneurship within,
     
marketing methods of,
company positioning
,
competition
     
competitive pricing,
     
“coopetition”,
     
in existing markets
,
     
high-fidelity MVP exposure to,
     
hypotheses brief on,
     
online research of
,
complaints, addressing,
conferences, industry
,
consideration phase
,
consultants,
consumer products
,
“contact us”,
contacts, purchasing,
content, landing page
,
contests
,
continuous deployment
,
contracts
,
“coopetition”
,
copy testing,
copyrights,
cost
     
budgeting,
     
calculating revenue to,
     
imposing high-switch,
     
re-validation of,
     
see also
 
pricing
cross-sell programs,
customer acquisition. 
see
 
acquisition
customer activation. 
see
 
activation
customer archetypes
     
budgeting based on,
     
compiling
,
customer behavior
     
high-fidelity MVP delivers data on,
     
measuring web/mobile,
     
metrics to track,
     
online tracking of,
customer creation
     
analyzing preparedness for,
     
burn rate in,
     
as “execute” mode,
customer data
     
constant collecting of
,
     
dashboard to monitor,
     
“data chief” as monitoring
,
     
for day-in-the-life analyses,
     
turning hypotheses into,
     
when to ignore,
customer development
     
burn rate by stage of,
     
informs vision,
     
Manifesto
,
     
success via,
     team
          
company-building from,
          
face-to-face validation by,
          
meetings,
          
positioning by
,
          
replaces traditional titles,
customer discovery
     
burn rate in,
     
end of, proving,
     
four phases of
,
     
GE Energy Storage case study,
     
goal of
,
     
re-validation prompting more,
     
weekly score-keeping for,
customer feedback
     
on acquisition trends
,
     
via advisors
,
     
answers questions,
     
in customer discovery phase,
     
enthusiasm assessment via,
     
as essential,
     
iteration as driven by,
     
market research via,
     
MVP as soliciting
,
     
in new markets,
     
online vs. in-person,
     
pivots in response to,
     
speed of web/mobile,
customer relationships
     
create demand
,
     
marketing based on,
     
re-validation of,
     
validating (physical),
     
validating (web/mobile)
,
     
see also
 
“get, keep, and grow” customers
customer retention. 
see
 
retention, customer
customer segments
     
marketing based on,
     
for physical products,
     
for web/mobile products,
customer service
,
customer validation
     
burn rate in,
     
determines product/market fit
,
     
determining preparedness for
,
     
E.piphany as case study of,
     
face-to-face,
     
founders lead,
     
four phases of,
     
as “get ready to sell”,
     
metrics for tracking,
     
overview of,
     
priorities,
     
sign of completed
,
     
spending constraint in,
     
with users,
customers
     
on the advisory board,
     
determining sufficient
,
     earlyvangelist. 
see
 
earlyvangelists
     
influences on
,
     lifetime value of. 
see
 
lifetime value
     
in new markets,
     
self-identifying
,
     
tracking
,
     
types of
,
     
understanding
,
     
see also
 
“get, keep, and grow” customers
customer-satisfaction survey,
D
Demand creation testing cost,
dashboard
,
data chiefs,
decision-makers
     
defined,
     
users as,
dedicated e-commerce,
delivery schedule
,
demand curve,
demand-creation
     
physical vs. web/mobile,
     
success as determined by,
     
see also
 
“get” customers
demos
,
dependency analysis,
direct mail,
direct sales,
distributors
     
web/mobile,
E
earlyvangelists
     
catering MVP to
,
     
customer validation with
,
     
defined,
     
payment by,
     
vision as bought by
,
earned media,
e-commerce
,
economic buyers,
E-mail
     
capturing,
     
marketing via,
     
purchasing lists,
     
renting lists,
E-mail cascades
,
end users
,
engagement,
engineering
     
acquisition tools,
     
designs for hypotheses tests,
     
feature-adding by,
     
iterative,
enterprise software,
E.piphany
,
equipment lease lines,
errors. 
see
 
mistakes
,
“execute” mode
     
customer creation as,
     
excludes learning/discovery,
     
of startup within GE,
“executing” business models,
     
see also
 
customer creation
executives
     
skills needed in startup,
     
unlearning of traditional sales,
existing markets
     
company positioning for,
     
competition in,
     
defined,
     
product positioning for
,
     
product-intro into,
     re-segmenting. 
see
 
re-segmented markets
     
sales-growth curve,
     
TAM and SAM portions of,
     
tools for analyzing,
experiments
     
diagramed,
     
insight gained from,
     
pass/fail metrics for
,
     
product mock-up for
,
     
solution tests,
external audit,
eye tracking
,
F
Facebook
,
factoring,
failure. 
see
 
mistakes
features, product
     
adapted via customer feedback,
     
competitive list-building of,
     
limited MVP,
     
list of,
     
over-adding,
financial model. 
see
 
revenue model
financial resources,
flash sales,
founders
     
customer validation as led by,
     
interaction with customers
,
     
internal audit by,
     
optimization by,
     
passion-driven,
     
previous employers of,
     
vision/instinct of
,
free trials
,
free-to-paid conversion
,
G
GE Energy Storage,
“get, keep, and grow” customers
     
customer discovery phase (physical),
     
customer discovery phase (web/mobile),
     
customer validation phase (web/mobile),
     
overview of,
     
as validation priority,
“get” customers (physical)
     
cost of,
     
four stages of,
     
via media exposure,
     
tactics for,
“get” customers (web/mobile)
     
as acquisition/activation
,
     
activation plan for,
     
archetypes guide,
     
cost of,
     
how to, during validation,
     
optimizing
,
     
refining tactics for,
     
reviewing effectiveness of
,
     
testing,
     
tips for,
“Get Out of the Building”
     
for customer validation,
     
as essential approach
,
     
to sell
,
     
to test perceived problem,
     
to test solution/product,
     
for web/mobile products,
global maximum,
Google
,
Google AdWords
,
Groupon,
“grow” customers (physical)
,
“grow” customers (web/mobile)
,
H
heat maps
,
high-fidelity MVP
     
delivers customer data,
     
as exposed to competitors,
     
how to create,
     
as pre-optimization tool,
     
as solution test
,
     
as validation tool,
home page. 
see
 
landing page
human resources,
hypotheses briefs
     
acquisition based on (web/mobile),
     
on the business model canvas,
     
on the competition,
     
on customer segments (physical),
     
on customer segments (web/mobile),
     
defined,
     
to “get, keep, grow” (physical),
     
to “get, keep, grow” (web/mobile),
     
on key resources,
     
low-fidelity MVP (web/mobile),
     
on market size,
     
on market type,
     
on physical sales channel,
     
on revenue streams,
     
reviewing,
     
value proposition (physical),
     
on web/mobile sales,
     
on web/mobile traffic partners,
hypotheses tests
     
on the business model canvas
,
     
customer discovery as
,
     
during customer validation,
     
designing,
     
determining end of,
     experiments for. 
see
 
experiments
     
metrics for tracking
,
     
to optimize “get” process
,
     
partners for,
     
in pivot-or-proceed phase,
     
rules to follow,
     
as trial and error,
I
incentives
     
as acquisition tool,
     
as activation tool
,
     
assessing success in,
     
for retention
,
incremental dollars,
industry analysts,
influencers
     
advisory board members as,
     
as customer type,
     
data on,
     
industry
,
insight
,
intellectual property,
internal audit,
Iridium,
iteration
     
continuous,
     
via “failure”,
     
from lukewarm product response,
     
of marketing,
     
speed of
,
     
weekly score-keeping for,
     
see also
 
pivots
J
joint new business development,
K
“keep” customers
     
physical,
     
web/mobile
,
     
see also
 
retention, customer
key partners,
key resources hypothesis,
key supplier relationships
,
keyword search,
L
landing page
,
latent problem,
launch. 
see
 
product launch
lead generation, online,
lifetime value, customer (LTV)
     
“get” programs that yield high,
     
“grow” metrics monitoring,
     
LTV=>CAQ,
     
as revenue consideration,
local maximum
,
lock-in, customer
,
Logan, Prescott
,
low-fidelity MVP
     
assessing interest in,
     
creating multiple,
     
“get, keep, grow” tests with,
     
how to build,
     
hypothesis brief on,
     
pass/fail testing with,
loyalty programs
,
M
market research
,
market size
,
market type
     
cost of entry by,
     
defined
,
     
hypotheses,
     
knowing your
,
     
positioning statement by,
     
product positioning by
,
     
pros/cons of,
     
relevance of contacts to,
     
revenue effects,
     
sales by,
     
validating (physical),
     
see also
 
clone market
; 
existing markets
; 
new markets
; 
re-segmented
markets
marketing
     
agency, hiring,
     
to “grow” customers,
     
iteration,
     online
          
creative,
          
via email,
          
importance of,
          
for the inexperienced,
          
lowers costs,
          
via the phone,
          
tips for,
     
team,
     viral
          
customer base for,
          
defined,
          
as inherent in a product,
          
referrals as,
          
techniques,
marketplaces,
market-requirements document (MRD),
media
     
earned and paid
,
     
exposure cost,
     
MVP press probes,
metrics, performance
     
daily review of,
     
essential for startups,
     
for “get” tactics,
     
for “grow” tactics,
     
for hypotheses tests
,
     
key,
     
over-doing,
     
retention monitored by,
     
for test sales,
     
toolset of,
     
tracking cost,
     
validating financial,
microsites
,
Microsoft
,
minimum feature set,
minimum viable product (MVP)
     
brief on,
     
as customer behavior measure,
     
earlyvangelists’ adoption of,
     
estimated launch of,
     “high fidelity”. 
see
 
high-fidelity MVP
     “low fidelity”. 
see
 
low-fidelity MVP
     
minimal features in
,
     
as proposed “solution”,
     
web/mobile
,
mission statement,
mistakes
     
cost money,
     
importance of,
     
intellectual property,
     
made by Iridium,
     
in traditional sales method,
mobile data vendors,
mobile products. 
see
 
web/mobile products
mobile-app commerce,
Moore, Geoffrey,
multi-sided markets
     
activation plan for,
     
contacting advertisers,
     
customer segments in,
     
earlyvangelists in,
     
financial considerations for,
     
“get” approaches for,
     
“Get Out of the Building” for,
     
metrics evaluating,
     
optimizing
,
     
sales channels for,
     
validation priorities for,
N
Net Promoter Score,
network-effect virality
,
new markets
     
company positioning for,
     
customer discovery in,
     
defined,
     
naming,
     
product positioning for
,
     
profit timeline,
     
sales-growth curve,
     
tips for entering,
next-selling,
niche markets. 
see
 
re-segmented markets
Nielsen, Jakob,
O
online behavior, analyzing,
online lead generation,
online marketing. 
see
 
marketing
optimization
     
focus of,
     
of “get” actions (web/mobile)
,
     
of “keep” actions (web/mobile),
     
little by little,
     
tools,
opt-outs,
orders
,
Osterwalder, Alexander
,
outreach programs,
outsourcing
,
P
paid media
,
partners
     
discovered via hypotheses tests,
     
for hypotheses testing,
     
key,
     
tips for gaining,
     
types of,
passion
,
passive problem
,
patents
,
pay-per-click (PPC)
,
pay-per-use,
personal advisors,
phone calls
     
to “keep” customers
,
     
as powerful sales tool
,
     
to referred customers,
physical channels
     
customer discovery in,
     
evaluating metrics for,
     
“get, keep, and grow” for,
     
market research in,
     
marketing strategies,
     
overview of,
     
validation of
,
     
web/mobile as combined with,
physical products
     
capital sources for,
     
customer segments for,
     
strategic alliances for,
physical resources,
pivot-or-proceed
     
business model validation,
     
data assembly for,
     
as final validation phase,
     
as moment of truth,
     
revenue model validation,
     
three steps to answering,
     
tools to assess,
     
web/mobile data to review,
pivots
     
business model canvas guides,
     
continuous,
     
customer feedback as source of,
     
after problem presentation,
     
product repackaging,
     
before spending/scaling,
     
see also
 
iteration
portfolio pricing,
positioning
     
company,
     
need for,
     
statement,
     
validating,
     
see also
 
product positioning
pr agency, 
see
 
public relations
pricing
     
as activation tool,
     
business-to-business sales,
     
demand-curve effects on,
     
techniques,
     
see also
 
cost
privacy laws,
problem presentations,
problem/need (customer)
     
active/acute
,
     
earlyvangelists’ awareness of,
     
measuring product/market fit for,
     
MVP to test
,
     
online acquisition tests of,
     
positioning statement address to,
     
tips for researching,
     
varying intensity of,
     
understanding,
problem/solution fit
,
problem/solution hypotheses
     
list of product benefits for,
     
testing
,
product development
     
advisors
,
     
for earlyvangelists,
     
ensures low-to-high fidelity MVP growth,
     
feature list for,
     
for the few, not the many
,
     
of MVP,
     
positioning by,
     
after problem presentation,
     
and re-validation
,
product launch
     
reasons for early,
     
“solution” test is not,
product positioning
     
customer development team develops,
     
how to develop,
     
by market type
,
     
statement
,
product specs
,
product-based pricing,
product-introduction, traditional
     
customer development is not,
product/market fit
     
determining
,
     
lack of,
     
measures of successful
,
product/service resources,
product-update bulletins,
provisional patents,
public relations
,
R
“razor/razor blade” model,
recommenders,
referrals, customer
     
as best “get” approach,
     
to broadcast MVP,
     
as measure of enthusiasm
,
     
metrics to track,
     
optimizing
,
     
as revenue source,
     
test magnitude of the problem,
     
tips for encouraging
,
     
as viral marketing,
referral banners,
repackaging,
repeatable business model,
re-segmented markets
     
assessing size of,
     
company positioning for,
     
defined
,
     
how to create,
     
via low-prices,
     
mapping,
     
product positioning for
,
     
sales-growth curve,
     
traffic partners in,
     
two types of,
resources, key,
retailers
     
major e-distribution,
     
return rights for,
retention, customer
     
ease of online,
     
long-term,
     
as measure of enthusiasm,
     
optimizing,
     
physical channels for,
     
tracking
,
     
web/mobile tactics for,
return on Investment (ROI)
,
revenue model
     
customer lifetime value factor,
     
for multi-sided markets,
     
re-validation of,
     
revenue forecasts via,
     
traffic partners in,
     
validating,
     
as validation priority,
     
for web/mobile products,
revenue sources
     
“growing” existing customers,
     
growth curve by market type,
     
for multi-sided markets,
     
by product and channel,
     
validating (physical),
     
for web/mobile products,
revenue stream hypothesis,
reversible decisions,
risk
     
in customer creation phase,
S
saboteurs,
sales
     
acquire/activate tools for web/mobile,
     
cost
,
     
delivery schedule evaluation,
     
determining quantity of,
     funnel
          
choke point,
          
“get” customers as
,
          
marketing drives into,
          
model of,
          
predictability of
,
          
roadmap,
          
see also
 
“get” customers
     
growth curve by market type,
     
pitch
,
     
preparing for,
     
VP
,
     
see also
 
business-to-business sales
; 
“test” sales
sales roadmap
     
advertising in,
     
customer discovery as informing,
     
“execution” prior to,
sales team
     
“data chief”,
     
unlearning by,
     
use of roadmap by
,
scalability
     
early measuring of web/mobile,
     
financial,
     
testing
,
scaling
     
analyzing dependency before,
     
business model re-validation before,
     
premature,
Schwab
,
search engine optimization (SEO),
“search” for business model
     
“execution” as confused with,
     
failure as integral to,
     
by GE Energy Storage
,
     
non-linear,
     
preserve cash during,
     
skills needed in,
     
transition to “execution”,
search-engine marketing,
served available market (SAM)
,
social networks
     
as acquisition tool,
     
brief sales pitches on,
     
commerce via,
     
fill needs/desires,
     
as high-engagement sites,
     
market size needed for,
     
marketing via
,
     
optimization efforts by,
     
retention via,
software sales
     
repackaging product for,
solution
     
customers’ attempts at,
     
sign of faulty,
     
testing,
solution presentation
     
customer behavior at,
spending
     
on acquisition,
     
constraining,
     
customer validation accelerates,
     
market type as driving,
     
re-validation before,
     
validation before,
startups
     
within big corporations,
     
“failure” as essential to,
     
intellectual property ownership by,
     
job titles in,
     
key components of,
     
metrics for,
     
mission of every,
     
as passionate,
     
speed/tempo of decision-making,
     
spending tempo for,
     team. 
see
 
team, startup
     
visionary instinct of,
     
winning vs. losing,
strategic alliances,
subscriptions
     
lifetime value of,
     
optimizing,
     
as pricing model
,
suppliers,
surveys
,
sweepstakes,
switching costs, high
,
T
“take rate”,
target market,
team, startup
     
business model canvas review,
     
as human resources,
     
pivot-or-proceed meetings,
     
seasoned leaders on,
     
sharing info among,
     
skills needed for,
     
successful web/mobile,
“test” sales
     
customer validation as,
     
to earlyvangelists,
     
optimizing web/mobile,
     
purpose of,
     
to traffic partners,
     
validate business model,
textlinks
,
total addressable market (TAM)
,
total cost of ownership/adoption (TCO),
tracking customers,
trade secrets,
trade shows,
trademarks,
traffic
     
competition for,
     
increasing
,
     
measuring competitors’,
     
partners
,
“try now” links,
Twitter
,
two-step e-distribution,
U
unbundling,
updates, product,
upsell
     
free-to-paid channel,
     
as “grow” tactic,
     
“take rate” for,
usability tests,
user engagement
     
as “get” tactic,
     
increasing,
     
inviting,
     
measuring enthusiastic,
     
usability tests of,
user interface,
user outreach,
user testing
,
V
value pricing,
value proposition
     
goal of,
     
hypotheses
,
     
on the landing page,
     
by market type,
     
marketing based on,
     
re-validation of,
     
validating (physical),
     
as validation priority,
vendor financing,
venture capital,
viral growth factor,
viral loop
     
in “get, keep, grow” (physical),
     
in “get, keep, grow” (web/mobile),
     
in “get” process
,
     
from “grow” to “get”,
     
in “keep” process,
viral marketing. 
see
 
marketing
viral products,
vision
     
customer development informs,
     
earlyvangelists as buying
,
     
in product brief,
     
reviewing product,
     
of solution, by customers,
volume pricing,
W
web influence maps,
web/mobile channels
     
assessing
,
     
customer discovery in,
     
hypothesis brief on,
     
market research in,
     
physical as combined with,
     
product as salesman in,
     
traffic partners in,
     
user story vs. feature list,
     
validation checkpoints,
web/mobile products
     
attracting customers to,
     
business model validation for,
     
customer behavior measures,
     
customer segment identification
,
     
distribution platforms,
     
earlyvangelists’ use of,
     
enthusiasm for, measuring
,
     
“Get Out of the Building” for,
     
“get ready to sell” actions,
     
hypotheses tests for,
     
market research for,
     
market sizing for
,
     
MVPS for,
     
prevalence of,
     
pricing,
     
push notifications,
     
refining “get” activities for,
     
sudden take-off of,
     
traffic partners for,
websites
     
functionality of,
     
increasing visitors to,
     
layout tips,
     
measuring engagement with,
     
research via,
     
return rate,
word of mouth,

The Startup Owner’s Manual for
Physical Channel Startups
Table of Contents
How to Read This Book
Getting Started
     
Chapter 1:
The Customer Development Manifesto
STEP ONE: Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 2:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
     
Chapter 3:
Customer Discovery, Phase One:
State Your Business Model Hypotheses
     
Chapter 4:
Customer Discovery, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do People Care?”
     
Chapter 5:
Customer Discovery, Phase Three:
“Get Out of the Building” and Test the Product Solution
     
Chapter 6:
Customer Discovery, Phase Four:
Verify the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
STEP TWO: Customer Validation
     
Chapter 7:
Introduction to Customer Validation
     
Chapter 8:
Customer Validation, Phase One:
“Get Ready to Sell”
     
Chapter 9:
Customer Validation, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building and Sell!”
     
Chapter 10:
Customer Validation, Phase Three:
Develop Product and Company Positioning
     
Chapter 11:
Customer Validation, Phase Four:
The Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
The Startup Owner’s Manual for Physical Channel Startups Index
How to Read This Book
C
LEARLY,
 
T
HE
 S
TARTUP
 O
WNER’S
 M
ANUAL
 IS
 not a novel. This book is a step-
by-step how-to guide that details a process for building a successful,
profitable, scalable startup. It has more in common with a car repair manual
than it does with your favorite page-turner. Don’t attempt to read this book in
a single sitting or long weekend. It will be your companion—and, we hope,
your very best friend—for the six to 30 months or more that it often takes to
begin building a successful, scalable startup business.
Organization
This book is organized in four distinct sections. The first, Getting Started,
describes the Customer Development methodology and ends with the
“Customer Development Manifesto,”
 a series of 14 guiding principles for
startups deploying the Customer Development process.
Don’t read too much at a time.
 
The next section, 
Step One, 
“Customer Discovery,”
 turns the founders’
vision into a business model canvas and then into a series of hypotheses.
Those hypotheses are turned into experiments, and tested with customers to
see if your understanding of the customer problem and proposed solution
mesh.
Step Two, 
“Customer Validation,”
 expands the scope of the business
model testing to see if you can get enough orders or users to prove that you
have a repeatable and scalable business model.
Interspersed throughout is a series of Checklists that help you track your
progress at every stage of the Customer Development process. Use the
checklists at the end of each step (yes, there’s one for each) to make sure you
have completed all the key tasks outlined in that step. Download them, share
them and circulate them to team members. But most important, use them to
be sure you have completed each step—before you move on to the next.
Paths Through This Book
     •   
Read the 
glossary
 first.
 Customer Development has a language all its
own.
     •   Before you dive into the details, 
read the 
Customer Development
Manifesto
.
     •   
If you are familiar with Customer Development,
 start with 
Chapter 3
,
“the business model hypotheses.”
     •   If you want to 
align co-founders, initial employees, investors and
advisors around the Customer Development philosophy,
 have them
read 
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Edition
.
     •   
If you want a high-speed overview and little more,
 there are two
approaches:
          (a)  skim the checklists at the end of each step, which will give you a
sense of all the tasks you must complete to implement Customer
Development; or
          (b)  flip through the book, looking for “jumbo quotes” like this:
This book is not a novel... It’s a reference manual.
 
These quotes highlight the 100 or so “big ideas” found throughout the
book and offer a “CliffsNotes” or “Twitter” sense of the text.
     •   
If you want a detailed checklist of the things founders need to get right,
start with 
Chapter 3
, “the business model hypothesis,” and use the
checklists at the end of each step.
     •   
If your startup is well under way,
 you might want to start at 
Chapter 6
,
“Pivot or Proceed,” to gauge your progress. Then you can jump to
Chapter 11
, “Metrics that Matter,” to see if you’re ready to scale.
     •   To 
develop and test a physical minimum viable product
 (MVP), read:
Customer Contacts
, 
Problem Understanding
, 
Customer
Understanding
, and 
The Sales Roadmap
.
     •   To focus on 
physical channel sales and marketing
 (how to “get”,
“keep” and “grow” customers), read:
          
   Hypotheses: 
Customer Segments Who/Problem
, 
Channels
,
Customer Relationships
, and 
Revenue Stream Pricing
.
          
   Prepare for 
Customer Contacts
, 
Problem Understanding
, 
Market
Knowledge
, 
Create Product Presentation
, and 
Test Solution with
Customer
.
          
   
Get Out of the Building: Create Sales and Collateral Materials
, 
Hire
Sales Closer
, 
Sales Channel Roadmap
, and 
Develop the Sales
Roadmap
.
     •   Educators who want to 
teach Customer Development
 or the experiential
Lean LaunchPad
 class should read:
          
   Our website, 
www.steveblank.com,
 with links to our 
syllabi
 used at
Stanford, Berkeley and the National Science Foundation.
          
   Before the class meets, have the students read:
               —  
The Customer Development Manifesto
 in Chapter 1
               —  
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
 in Chapter 1
          
   Each week’s lectures are organized around 
each of the individual
hypotheses in Phase 1
.
          
   For the 
Lean LaunchPad
 class
, have students read:
               —  
Get Out of the Building and Test the Problem
 in Chapter 4.
               —  
Get Out of the Building and Test the Product Solution
 in
Chapter 5.
          
   All classes should read:
               —  
Pivot or Proceed
, in Chapter 6.
               —  
Metrics that Matter
, in Chapter 11.
A Few Helpful Tips
Use the checklists.
 There is one for every step.
Don’t read too much at a time.
 This is a reference manual. It’s
exhausting when read as a book. Take “small bites” of a few sections at a
time, at most.
Scan ahead.
 It gives you context for what you are currently doing. If
you’re starting work on 
Chapter 3
, for example, quickly scan 
Chapter 4
 first
so you understand how what you’re doing now supports what comes next.
 
For a helpful online tool to monitor your team’s progress
 in the
Customer Development process, visit
http://www.zoomstra.com/foundersworkbook
.
 
Entrepreneurship is not a cookbook or a checklist.
 At the end of the day,
founders are artists. Don’t expect everything to work like the book. It’s
impossible for this book to address every entrepreneurial decision and every
type of startup. You’re outside the building not only looking for facts, but for
insight and inspiration. Not every piece of advice fits every situation you’ll
encounter. And not every piece of advice will always work. That’s what
entrepreneurs are for.
CHAPTER 1
The Customer Development Manifesto
B
EFORE DIVING HEADFIRST INTO THE DETAILS
 of the Customer Development
process, it’s crucial to review the 14 rules that make up 
The Customer
Development Manifesto
. Embrace them. Review them regularly with the team
and (maybe after the IPO) consider perhaps even etching them in marble at
world headquarters.
Rule No. 1:
There Are No Facts Inside Your Building, So Get
Outside.
On Day One, the startup is a faith-based enterprise built on its founders’
vision and a notable absence of facts. The founders’ job is to translate this
vision and these hypotheses into facts. Facts live outside the building, where
future customers (prospects, really) live and work, so that’s where you need
to go. Nothing is more fundamental to Customer Development, and nothing
is harder to do. It’s much easier to write code, build hardware, have meetings
and write reports than it is to find and listen to potential customers. But that’s
what separates the winners from the losers.
Facts live outside the building, where future
customers live and work...
 
In Customer Development, the 
founders gather firsthand experience
about every component of the business model. The team can support the
founders, but firsthand 
experience by definition cannot be delegated.
 This
customer research must be done by founders because:
Key customer feedback points are random, unpredictable, and often
painful to hear. Employees hate to deliver bad news to higher-ups
Employees have far less at stake and seldom listen as acutely, and they
don’t get heard adequately when they report back. It’s too easy to
dismiss their findings as “hearsay” or to ignore critical points of
feedback
Consultants have even less at stake than employees and often color their
commentary to either tell the client what he wants to hear or deliver
messages that can lead to extended consulting relationships. This is also
second- or third-hand feedback and too diluted or diffused to provide
value
Only a founder can embrace the feedback, react to it, and adeptly make
the decisions necessary to change or pivot key business model components.
Rule No. 2:
Pair Customer Development with Agile
Development
Customer Development is useless unless the product
development organization can iterate the product
with speed and agility.
 
Customer Development is useless unless the product development
organization can iterate the product with speed and agility. If Engineering
builds the product using waterfall development, it will be deaf, dumb and
blind to customer input except during a short period when it’s specifying the
product. The rest of the time, engineers are locked into an implementation
cycle, unable to change the product features without intolerable delay. By
contrast, a startup engineering organization 
using an agile methodology is
designed to continually take customer input and deliver a product that iterates
readily around an MVP or its minimum feature set.
In this book, 
agile engineering/development
 refers to the rapid
deployment, iterative development and continuous discovery processes that
hardware or software companies can use. We don’t advocate any particular
flavor, just its necessity. The Customer Development process provides the
continuous customer input to make agile work.
Before the company even starts, the founders need to reach a deep and
inexorable commitment to the customer/agile development partnership.
Rule No. 3:
Failure is an Integral Part of the Search
One of the key differences between a startup and an existing company is the
one that’s never explicitly stated: “startups go from failure to failure.”
In contrast, existing companies have learned what works and doesn’t.
Failures in an existing company are an exception. They happen when
someone screws up. In a startup, you’re 
searching,
 not 
executing,
 and the
only way to find the right path is to try lots of experiments and take a lot of
wrong turns. 
Failure is part of the process
.
If you’re afraid to fail in a startup, you’re destined
to do so.
 
Failures are not truly failures, per se but an integral part of the startup
learning process. You’ll be running dozens if not hundreds of pass/fail tests
—on your pitch, your features, your pricing, and on and on—so get ready to
accept failure and move on. When something isn’t working, successful
founders orient themselves to the new facts, decide what needs fixing, and act
decisively.
The Customer Development process demands frequent, agile iteration,
followed, of course, by testing of the iteration that often leads to another
iteration or pivot, which leads to more testing and...
If you’re afraid to fail in a startup, you’re destined to do so.
Rule No. 4:
Make Continuous Iterations and Pivots
The strategy of embracing failure in Customer Development demands
frequent, agile iteration and pivots. A pivot is a substantive change in one or
more of the nine boxes of the business model canvas. (For example, a pricing
change from freemium to subscription model or a customer segment shift
from boys 12-15 years old to women 45-60.) Or it can be more complex,
such as a change of target customer or user. Iterations, meanwhile, are minor
changes to business model components (e.g., changing pricing from $99 to
$79).
Groupon’s legendary $12 billion pivot is a perfect
example.
 
When a company is limping along, only a dramatic change to one or
more business model components can get it back on the road to success.
Groupon’s legendary $12 billion pivot (their IPO valuation) is a perfect
example. Groupon was started from a company called the Point. It was
struggling, at best, as a social media platform working to get people together
to solve problems, but was about to run out of money.
The most effective campaigns on The Point were those that saved people
money by grouping or bundling their purchases. The founders started
blogging various deals from different businesses each day. They called this,
“Get Your 
Groupon.com
.” Groupon’s first offer hit in October of 2008: buy
two pizzas for the 
price of one in the shop on the first floor of its Chicago
headquarters. Twenty people bought the deal and the company was well on
its way to its $12-billion pivot.
Pivots are driven by the learnings and insight from a continuous stream
of “pass/fail” tests you run throughout discovery and validation.
The best startup founders don’t hesitate to make the change. They admit
when hypotheses are wrong and adapt.
Rule No. 5:
No Business Plan Survives First Contact with
Customers So Use a 
Business Model Canvas
There’s only one reason for a business plan: some investor who went to
business school doesn’t know any better and wants to see one. But once it has
delivered financing, the business plan is fundamentally useless.
Entrepreneurs often mistake their business plan as a cookbook for execution,
failing to recognize that it is only a collection of unproven assumptions. At its
back, a revenue plan blessed by an investor, and composed overwhelmingly
of guesses, suddenly becomes an operating plan driving hiring, firing, and
spending. Insanity.
The difference between a static business plan and a
dynamic model could well be the difference between
flameout and success.
 
The difference between a static business plan and a dynamic business
model could well be the difference between a flameout and success. Startups
should dump the business 
plan
 and adopt the flexible business 
model.
A business model describes the flow between key components of the
company:
value proposition,
 which the company offers (product/service, benefits)
customer segments,
 such as users, and payers, or moms or teens
distribution channels
 to reach customers and offer them the value
proposition
customer relationships
 to create demand
revenue streams
 generated by the value proposition(s)
resources
 needed to make the business model possible
activities
 necessary to implement the business model
partners
 who participate in the business and their motivations for doing
so
cost structure
 resulting from the business model
The business model 
canvas
 (see 
Figure 1.1
) presents a visual overview
of the nine components of a business on one page. In this book, Alexander
Osterwalder’s business model canvas serves as the scorecard for the customer
discovery process described in Step One. Osterwalder’s book 
Business Model
Generation
 (Wiley, 2010) provides the structure for the canvas.
Business Model Canvas
 (Figure 1.1)
As a startup moves through the Customer Development process, it will
use the business model canvas as a scorecard, by posting the hypotheses
about each component of the model and then revising the hypotheses as the
founders gather facts. Think of your first version of the business model
canvas as the starting point showing the hypotheses that must be confirmed in
face-to-face or online interaction with customers. More often than not, the
customers will reject components of the business model, saying, “I’d rather
buy that from a retailer,” or, “The product needs to have these features to be
important to me.” As customers approve or dispute the business model
hypotheses, the company either accepts the customers’ approval or pivots to
change its business model to better target the opportunity.
Using the business model canvas as a guide makes it easier to figure out
where and how to pivot, since the team can visually diagram its alternatives
and see what it needs to change. Each time the founders iterate or pivot (see
Rule No. 4
) in response to customer feedback, they draw a new canvas
showing the changes. Over time, these multiple canvases form a “flip book”
that shows the evolution of the business model. Agile startups can end up
with a six-inch-thick stack of business model diagrams they can burn at the
IPO-celebration bonfire.
Much more about how to use business model diagrams to “keep score”
throughout the customer discovery process can be found in 
Chapter 2
.
...hypothesis is just a fancy word for “guess.”
 
Rule No. 6:
Design Experiments and Test to Validate Your
Hypotheses
Initially, hypothesis is just a fancy word for “guess.” To turn hypotheses into
facts, founders need to get out of the building and 
test
 them in front of
customers. But how do you test? And what do you want to learn from the
tests? Testing and learning require you to be thoughtful on constructing and
designing your tests. We call this “designing the experiments.”
Customer Development experiments are short, simple, objective
pass/fail tests. You’re looking for a strong signal in the signal/noise noise
ratio, something like five of the first 12 customers you call on saying “I need
this right now, even if it’s still buggy.” Early tests aren’t necessarily precise,
but should give you a “good enough” signal to proceed.
The Customer Development Insight Cycle
 (Figure 1.2)
Start by asking yourself, “What insight do I need to move forward?”
Then ask, “What’s the simplest test I can run to get it?” Finally, think about,
“How do I design an experiment to run this simple test?”
One of the things that trips up engineering founders is thinking that
these tests have to be actual code, hardware or the real product. Most of the
time you can mock-up the web page or create a demo or physical prototype to
elicit valuable learning.
Rule No. 7:
Agree on Market Type. It Changes Everything
One of the radical insights guiding this book is that 
not all startups are alike.
One of the key ways in which they are different is in the relationship between
a startup’s 
new product and its market. These product/market relationships
generally fit one of these descriptions:
bringing a new product into an 
existing market
bringing a new product into a 
new market
bringing a new product into an existing market and trying to:
re-segment that market as a low-cost entrant or
re-segment that market 
as a niche entrant
cloning
 a business model that’s successful in another country
What confused entrepreneurs for decades is that the traditional product
introduction model works when introducing a product into an existing market
with a known business model (i.e., known customers, channels and markets).
However, since the majority of startups are not pursuing known markets
(those in new or re-segmented categories), they don’t really know who their
customers will be. These types of startups are searching for a repeatable and
scalable business model.
Market type influences everything a company does.
 
Market type influences everything a company does.
 Strategy and tactics
that work for one market type seldom work for another. Market type
determines the startup’s customer feedback and acquisition activities and
spending. It changes customer needs, adoption rates, product features and
positioning as well as its launch strategies, channels and activities. In sum,
different market types require dramatically different discovery, MVPs, and
sales and marketing strategies.
In existing markets,
 where customers exist, marketing is relatively easy:
users can describe the market and the attributes that matter the most to them.
The new product or service typically runs faster, does something better or
cheaper, or 
otherwise improves on a customer-defined attribute. Users, the
market, and competitors are known, and competition involves comparing the
product and its features with others.
In a new market,
 a company lets customers do something they couldn’t do
before by creating something that never existed before. Or it dramatically
lowers costs to create a new class of users. By definition, new markets have
no customers yet, so there’s nobody to know what the product can do or why
they should buy. This makes getting feedback and creating demand
particularly challenging, since the product is unknown to users and the
market is undefined and unknown, and costly to develop.
The key isn’t competing, but instead understanding whether a large
customer base exists and whether customers can be persuaded to buy. A
classic founder error in a new market is the “fast-burn” spending of sales and
marketing funds, a practice that may be appropriate when selling to existing
customers in a known market, but makes no sense in a new market. The new-
vs.-existing axis is at the core of the market-type definition.
Re-segmenting an existing market
 is useful when the incumbent is too
difficult to attack head-on (like Amazon, Facebook, or Microsoft). A re-
segmentation strategy is based on the startup’s market and customer
knowledge, ideally identifying a market opportunity that incumbents are
missing, which usually takes one of two forms: a low-cost strategy or a niche
strategy. (Unlike differentiation, segmentation forges a distinct spot in
customers’ minds that is unique, valuable, and in demand.)
Low-cost re-segmentation
 is just what it sounds like. Are there
customers at the low end of an existing market who will buy “good enough”
performance at a substantially lower price?
Niche re-segmentation
 looks at an existing market and asks whether
some segment of this market would buy a new product designed to address
more specific needs. Can some sizable portion of the market be convinced
that a characteristic of the new product is radical enough to change the rules
and shape of an existing market. 
See Chan Kim and Renee Mauborgne’s
work on 
“Blue Ocean Strategy”
 for another way to think of re-segmenting a
market.
Cloning an existing business model
 is a powerful technique when an
existing business has been proven in one country but has not yet been
introduced in another. Startups in Russia, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan and
China (each with its own large local market and language and cultural
barriers) can adopt, borrow, or copy a successful American business model
and customize it for local language and buying preferences. (Soon ideas from
those countries will be cloned in the U.S.)
For example, Baidu in China and Yandex in Russia are the equivalent of
Google in their respective markets. And Qzone, RenRen, PengYou and
Kaixin are the Facebooks of China, while Vkontakte and Odnoklassniki play
the same role in Russia.
Startup companies generally enter one of these four market types and
ultimately must commit to one. The consequences of a wrong market-type
choice will prove to be severe in the customer creation stage. While market
type is ultimately a “late-binding decision,” a working hypothesis helps frame
early customer discovery issues. Market-type decision-making is explored in
greater detail in 
Chapter 2.
...the few financial metrics to track: cash-burn rate,
number of months’ worth of cash left...
 
Rule No. 8:
Startup Metrics Differ from Those in Existing
Companies
We now have several centuries’ worth of performance metrics for existing
businesses—P&Ls balance sheets, cash-flow forecasts and line-of-business
analyses, plus scores of others. Here’s hoping your startup becomes big
enough to need them someday. In the past (not so long ago), we used these
tools with startups because we didn’t know what else to measure. We now
know that startup metrics should focus on tracking the startup’s progress
converting guesses and hypotheses into incontrovertible facts rather than
measuring the execution of a static plan. It’s critical 
that board and
management continuously test and measure each hypothesis until the entire
business model is worth scaling into a company.
If the company is venture-backed, management and investors must agree
on a set of metrics that truly matter and work toward a report or “dashboard”
that essentially replaces the P&L, cash flow, and balance sheet as
centerpieces of early board meetings.
Startup metrics track the results of pass/fail tests and the iterations they lead
to:
Have the customer problem and product features been validated?
Does the minimum feature set resonate with customers?
Who in fact is the customer, and have initial customer-related
hypotheses on the likes of value proposition, customer segments, and
channels been validated through face-to-face customer interaction?
Customer-validation questions might include: average order size,
customer lifetime value, average time to first order, rate of sales pipeline
growth, improvement in close rate, and revenue per salesperson.
In addition to the startup metrics above, the relatively few financial
metrics that a startup board should be tracking are cash-burn rate, number of
months’ worth of cash left, short-term hiring plans, and amount of time until
the company reaches cash-flow break-even.
Make sure decisions are fact-based, not faith-based.
 
Rule No. 9:
Fast Decision-Making, Cycle Time, Speed and
Tempo
Speed matters at startups where the only absolute certainty is that the bank
balance declines every day. While 
Rule No. 4
 addresses iterations and pivots,
it doesn’t specify how long they should take. Unequivocally, the faster the
better, since the 
faster these “learn, build, pivot” or “iterate, build” cycles
happen, the greater the odds of finding a scalable business model with the
cash on hand. If cycles happen too slowly, the startup runs out of cash and
dies. The biggest impediment to cycle time is psychological: it requires the
admission of being wrong or even of suffering a short-term tactical defeat.
While pivots and iterations are about speed outside the building, speed
also matters inside the company. Most startup decisions are made in the face
of uncertainty. There’s seldom a clear-cut, perfect solution to any
engineering, customer or competitor problem, and founders shouldn’t
agonize over trying to find one. This doesn’t mean gambling with the
company’s fortunes on a whim. It means adopting plans with an acceptable
degree of risk and doing so quickly. (Make sure these decisions are fact-
based, not faith-based.) In general, the company that consistently makes and
implements decisions rapidly gains a tremendous, often-decisive competitive
advantage.
...startups should make reversible decisions before
anyone leaves the CEO’s office.
 
Startup decisions have two states: 
reversible and irreversible
. A
reversible decision could be adding or dropping a product feature or a new
algorithm in the code or targeting a specific set of customers. If the decision
proves a bad one, it can be unwound in a reasonable period of time. An
irreversible decision such as firing an employee, launching a product, or
signing a long lease on expensive office space is usually difficult or
impossible to reverse.
Startups should as policy, 
make reversible decisions before anyone
leaves the CEO’s office
 or before a meeting ends. Perfect decision-making is
both unimportant and impossible, and what matters more is forward
momentum and a tight, fact-based feedback loop to quickly recognize and
reverse bad decisions. By the time a big company gets the committee to get
the subcommittee to pick a meeting date, most startups have made 20
decisions, reversed five, and implemented the other 15.
Learning to make decisions quickly is just part of the equation. Agile
startups have mastered another trick: tempo—the ability to make quick
decisions consistently and at all levels in the company. Speed and tempo are
integral parts of startup DNA, and a great startup’s tempo is often 10 times
that of a large company.
Rule No. 10:
It’s All About Passion
A startup without driven, passionate people is dead the day it opens its doors.
“Startup people”
 are different. They think different. In contrast, most people
are great at execution. They work to live, do their jobs well, and enjoy their
family, their lives, their hobbies and often even enjoy mowing the lawn.
They’re terrific at executing fixed tasks, and it’s a wonderful life for almost
everyone.
The people leading almost every successful startup in history are just
different. They’re a very tiny percentage of the world population, and their
brains are wired for chaos, uncertainty, and blinding speed. They’re
irrationally focused on customer needs and delivering great products. Their
job is their life. It’s not 9-to-5, it’s 24/7. These are the people who found
high-growth, highly-successful scalable startups.
Startups demand execs who are comfortable with
uncertainty, chaos and change.
 
Rule No. 11:
Startup Job Titles Are Very Different from a Large
Company’s
In an existing company, job titles reflect the way tasks are organized to
execute a known business model. For example, the “Sales” title in an existing
company means there’s a sales team repeatedly selling a known product to a
well-understood group of customers, using a standard corporate presentation
with an 
existing price list and standard terms, conditions and contract. The
“Sales” title in an existing company is all about execution around a series of
knowns.
Compared with big companies, startups need executives whose skills are
180 degrees different. 
Startups demand execs who are comfortable with
uncertainty, chaos and change
—with presentations and offers changing
daily, with the product changing often, with probing and gaining insights
from failure rather than high-fiving a success. In short, they need the rare
breed:
open to learning and discovery—highly curious, inquisitive, and creative
eager to search for a repeatable and scalable business model
agile enough to deal with daily change and operating “without a map”
readily able to wear multiple hats, often on the same day
comfortable celebrating failure when it leads to learning and iteration
We suggest replacing traditional execution-oriented sales, marketing and
business development titles with a single title: the Customer Development
team. At first, this “team” will consist of the company’s founder(s), who talks
with customers to gain enough insights to develop the minimum viable
product. Later, as the startup moves into customer validation, the team may
grow to include a dedicated “sales closer” responsible for the logistics of
getting early orders signed. The closer shouldn’t be confused with a
traditional sales VP. To succeed in this process, the team must have:
the ability to listen to customer objections and understand whether they
are issues about the product, the presentation, the pricing or something
else (or the wrong type of customer)
experience in talking to and moving between customers and engineers
confidence amid a state of constant change, often operating “without a
map”
the ability to walk in their customers’ shoes, understanding how they
work and the problems they face
Some would say this checklist isn’t bad for identifying great entrepreneurs.
Rule No. 12:
Preserve All Cash Until Needed. Then Spend.
The goal of Customer Development is not to avoid spending money but to
preserve cash while 
searching for the repeatable and scalable business
model
. Once found, then spend like there’s no tomorrow
. This paragraph is
worth deconstructing:
Preserve cash:
 When a startup has unlimited cash (Internet bubbles,
frothy venture climate), it can iterate on its mistakes by burning more dollars.
When money is tight, without dollars to redo mistakes, it’s crucial to
minimize waste. The Customer Development process preserves cash by not
hiring any sales and marketing staff until the founders turn hypotheses into
facts and discover a viable product/market fit.
While searching:
 Customer Development observes that at the start, the
company and its business model are based solely on hypotheses, not facts,
and that the founders need to get out of the building to turn these hypotheses
into customer data. This “get out of the building” approach, combined with
rapid iteration and pivots, is central to the model’s customer discovery and
validation steps.
...preserve cash while searching for the repeatable
and scalable business model...
 
Repeatable:
 Startups may get orders that stem from board members’
customer relationships, engineering one-offs, or heroic single-shot efforts by
the CEO. These are great, but they aren’t repeatable by a sales organization.
Search not for the one-off revenue hits but rather for a pattern that can be
replicated by a sales organization selling off a price list or by customers
regularly visiting the website.
Scalable:
 The goal is not to get one customer but many—and for each
additional customer to add incremental revenue 
and
 profit. The test is: Does
the addition of one more salesperson or more marketing dollars bring in more
gross profit (or users or clicks) than you invested? Who influences a sale?
Who recommends a sale? 
Who is the decision-maker? Who is the economic
buyer? Where’s the budget for purchasing this type of product? What’s the
customer acquisition cost? Affirming the 
repeatable, scalable sales model
 is
the customer validation step of Customer Development, its most important
phase. Has the team learned how to sell a target customer? Can this happen
before the startup runs out of money?
Search not for the one-off revenue hits but rather
for a pattern...
 
Business model:
 A business model answers the basic questions of how
the company makes money. Is this a revenue play, or is it a freemium model
seeking users? Something else? Who’s the customer?
Spend like there’s no tomorrow:
 The goal of an investor-backed startup
is not to build a lifestyle business. The goal is to reach venture scale (10
times the return on investment or more). When management and board agree
that they’ve found a repeatable and scalable sales model (i.e., have a
product/market fit), 
then invest the dollars to create end-user demand and
drive those customers into the sales channel
.
Rule No. 13:
Communicate and Share Learning
An integral part of Customer Development’s “learning and discovery”
philosophy is 
sharing everything that’s learned outside the building
 with
employees, co-founders and even investors.
The traditional way to do this is via weekly company meetings to keep
employees informed and board meetings to let the investors understand the
progress made in the search for the business model. But technology in the
21st-century has taken us to places we never could get to before. We can now
communicate all we’re learning in near-real time to everyone who needs to
know.
We strongly recommend that the founders keep and share all their
activities in the customer discovery step 
via a blog
, CRM or product
management tool. A powerful tool to help founding team members and their
investors and advisors communicate about progress in evolving their business
model and sharing or discussing customer discovery has been developed in
concert with the authors and can be found at 
LaunchPadCentral.com
. It
records hypotheses the startup started with, who the team has talked to, the
questions asked, the tests conducted, what’s been learned, and questions for
advisors or investors. While this may seem burdensome, it takes less time
than having a weekly coffee with an advisory board member. What results is
a communications tool allowing outsiders to view the company’s progress up
close and to offer suggestions and course corrections.
Rule No. 14:
Customer Development Success Begins With Buy-
In
Customer Development’s “learning and discovery” philosophy can be
immensely disorienting to a founder, engineer or investor who has spent his
or her career 
executing a plan.
 For Customer Development to succeed,
everyone on the team—from investor or parent company to engineers,
marketeers and founders—needs to understand and agree that the Customer
Development process is different to its core. If the engineering VP is talking
waterfall development or the board demands a rigid timetable, Customer
Development is destined for disaster. Everyone must accept the process,
recognizing that this is a fluid, nonlinear 
search for a business model
 that can
sometimes last for years.
The Customer Development process is different to
its core.
 
Customer Development changes almost every aspect of startup behavior,
performance, metrics, and, as often as not, success potential. It’s not just a
“nice to do” while executing the revenue model in the back of the business
plan. Customer Development 
reinvents the business model on the fly,
iterating often and pivoting 
whenever indicated. Founders need to have the
commitment of the team 
and board
 before embarking on Customer
Development. Ensure that all understand and agree that it’s iterative,
necessary, and worthwhile and that it changes the benchmarks and metrics
along the way.
Comments such as “The product is already spec’ed, and we can’t change
the features since development is already underway,” or “We already have
the factory (or sales team or marketing materials) built,” or “We have to
launch to make the numbers in the plan,” are all red flags. To succeed at
Customer Development, the company must abandon the old model’s
emphasis on execution of a fantasy business plan. Instead it must commit to a
Customer Development process stressing learning, discovery, failure, and
iteration in the search for a successful business model. If you’re ready for this
process, this book will tell you how to do it.
Summary: The Customer Development
Process
The Customer Development process reflects the best practices of winning
startups. It is the only approach for web-based businesses where failure is
certain without constant customer feedback and product iteration as they
search for their audiences. Customer Development’s fast cycle times and
inherent cash conservation gives all entrepreneurs more chances to pivot,
iterate, and succeed before the bank account runs dry. Describe this model to
entrepreneurs who have taken companies all the way to a lucrative exit and
beyond, and heads nod in recognition.
While each step has its own specific objectives, the process as a whole
has one overarching goal: discovering the repeatable, scalable, and ultimately
profitable business before running out of cash. This transforms the company
from a set of founding hypotheses into a moneymaking endeavor.
Customer Development is damn hard work. You
can’t fake it.
 
Customer Development is damn hard work. You can’t fake it. You can’t
just do the slides or “do” the process in a weekend. It’s a full-time, full-body-
contact sport. It’s a long-term commitment to changing the way a startup is
built. But it’s also proven to increase the chances of startup success.
Checklist 1: Board And Management Buy-In
Goal:
 Agreement among investors, founders, and team on commitment to the
Customer Development process.
Reference
: Chapter 1, Manifesto Rule #14
     
  Commit to use of Business Model and Market Type.
     
  Understand the difference between “search” for a business model and
“execute” a business plan
     
  Learn differences between Product Development and Customer
Development
     
  Discuss number of “funded Pivots” available and how board and team
will measure company progress
Customer Development process emphasizes learning and discovery
     
  Is there board and founding team buy-in for this process?
     
  Is there is enough funding for 2 to 3 Pivots in Discovery and
Validation?
Discuss Market Type (initial decision)
     
  Existing, Resegmented, New or Clone?
     
  First pass with board on initial agreement of Market Type
     
  First pass with board on different funding needs by Market Type
Agree on Customer Development Time Frame
     
  Approximate time for Discovery and Validation
     
  Discovery exit criteria determined
     
  Validation exit criteria determined
Exit Criteria:
     
  Buy-in of the team and board for Customer Development process
     
  Market Type and exit criteria for each step
Checklist 2: The Customer Development Team
Goal
: Set up the Customer Development Team.
Reference:
 Chapter 1, Manifesto Rule #1
Review the organizational differences between Customer Development
and the traditional product introduction process
     
  Founders spend time outside the building
     
  No VP of Sales or Marketing
     
  Initial team responsibilities
Team Setup and Goals
     
  Agree on who leads the team
     
  Agree on the “getting out of the building” methodology
     
  Agree on % of customer feedback online versus eyeball
     
  Agree on the team roles for each of the four Customer Development
Steps
Enumerate 3 to 5 Core Values of the Founding Team
     
  Not a mission statement
     
  Not about profit or products
     
  Core ideology is about what the company believes in
Exit Criteria
:
     
  Buy-in of the team and board for a customer development team
     
  Are the right people in those jobs?
II
Step One: Customer Discovery
Chapter 2:
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
Chapter 3:
Customer Discovery, Phase One:
State Your Business Model Hypotheses
Chapter 4:
Customer Discovery, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do People Care?”
Chapter 5:
Customer Discovery, Phase Three:
“Get Out of the Building” and Test the Product Solution
Chapter 6:
Customer Discovery, Phase Four:
Verify the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
Overview of the Customer Discovery Process


CHAPTER 2
An Introduction to Customer Discovery
No startup business plan survives first contact with customers.
—Steve Blank
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.
—Lao Tzu
I
RIDIUM WAS ONE OF THE BIGGEST STARTUP
 gambles ever made—a bold and
audacious $5.2 billion bet. Founded by Motorola and a global partnership of
18 companies in 1991, Iridium planned to build a mobile telephone system
that would work “anywhere on Earth,” from ships in the middle of the ocean
to the jungles of Africa to remote mountain peaks where no cell towers
existed.
How? With an out-of-this-world business plan. First, the company
bought a fleet of 15 rockets from Russia, the U.S. and China. Next, it
launched an armada of 72 private satellites into orbit, where they acted like
500-mile-high cell towers providing phone coverage to any spot on Earth.
Seven years after Iridium’s founding, its satellites were in place. But nine
months after the first call was made in 1998, the company was in Chapter 11
bankruptcy. When Iridium crashed back to Earth, it ranked as one of the
largest startup failures on record. What went wrong?
When Iridium was founded in 1991, worldwide cell-phone coverage was
sparse, unreliable and expensive. Cell-phone handsets were the size of lunch
boxes. Iridium put together a business plan that made assumptions about
customers, their problems and the product needed to solve those problems.
Other assumptions about sales channel, partnerships, and revenue model all
added up to a set of financial forecasts that Iridium would soon be printing
money.

One of the largest startup failures on record as they
executed their business plan.
 
But in the seven-plus years it took Iridium to go from concept to launch,
innovation in mobile- and cell-phone networks moved at blinding speed. By
the time Iridium launched, there were far fewer places on the planet where
cell-phone service was unavailable. Traditional cell-phone companies
provided coverage in the most valuable parts of the world. Prices for cell
service shrunk as fast as phone handsets did. In contrast, Iridium’s satellite
phone was bigger than a brick and weighed about as much. Worse, Iridium’s
cell phone couldn’t make calls from cars or buildings, since it required line-
of-sight “connection” to the satellites. Instead of 50 cents per minute for a
regular cell call, Iridium’s calls cost $7 a minute, plus $3,000 for the handset
itself.
Iridium’s potential market shrunk nearly every day. Instead of a massive
worldwide market of potential users, it had drawn only a small group willing
to pay 
its prices and put up with the product’s many limitations. But
Iridium’s business model assumptions and plans were firmly fixed as if it was
still 1991. The company spent $5 billion building a business over eight years
without ever focusing on four key questions:
Have we identified a problem a customer wants to see solved?
Does our product solve this customer problem or need?
If so, do we have a viable and profitable business model?
Have we learned enough to go out and sell?
Answering these questions is the purpose of the first step in the
customer discovery process. This chapter explains how to go about it.
(Twenty years later, Iridium emerged from bankruptcy. In 2000, an
investor group bought $6 billion worth of its assets for $25 million. After a
long climb back, the company celebrated its 500,000
th
 customer in September
2011.)
Customers don’t behave like your business plan.
 
The Customer Discovery Philosophy
A startup begins with the vision of its founders: a vision of a new product or
service that solves a customer’s problems or needs and of how it will reach
its many customers. Customer discovery lowers the odds of spending zillions
and getting zeros in return as the Iridium team did. So the No. 1 goal of
customer discovery amounts to this: turning the founders’ initial hypotheses
about their market and customers into facts.
Get Out of the Building
Facts exist only outside the building,
 where customers live, so the most
important aspect of customer discovery is getting out of the building, in front
of customers. And not for a few days or a week, but repeatedly, over weeks if
not months. This critical task can’t be assigned to junior staffers and must be
driven by founders. Only after the founders have performed this step will
they know whether they have a valid vision or just a hallucination.
Sounds simple, doesn’t it? But for anyone who has worked in
established companies, the customer discovery process is disorienting. All the
rules about new-product management in large companies are turned upside
down. It’s instructive to enumerate all things you are 
not
 going to do:
understand the needs and wants of 
all
 customers
make a list of 
all
 the features customers want before they buy your
product
hand Product Development a features list of the sum of 
all
 customer
requests
hand Product Development a detailed marketing-requirements document
run focus groups and test customers’ reactions to your product to see if
they will buy
What you 
are
 going to do is develop your product for the few, not the
many. Moreover, you’re going to start building your product even before you
know whether you have any customers for it.
On a startups first day, there’s limited—if any—
customer input.
 
For an experienced marketing or product management executive, these
ideas are not only disorienting and counterintuitive but heretical. Why aren’t
the needs of 
all
 potential customers important? What is it about a first
product from a new 
company that’s different from follow-on products in a
large company? What is it about a startup’s first customers that make the
rules so different?
Search for the Problem/Solution Fit
The customer discovery process searches for problem/solution fit: “have we
found a problem lots of people want us to solve (or a need they want us to
fill)” and “does our solution (a product, a website, or an app) solve the
problem in a compelling way?” At its core, the essence of customer discovery
is to determine whether your startup’s value proposition matches the
customer segment it plans to target.
Problem/solution fit is virtually identical to what’s sometimes called
“product/ market fit,” as the previous paragraph indicates. As a result, 
we use
the terms somewhat interchangeably
 throughout the book. Do realize,
however, that in multi-sided markets, there may be multiple value
propositions and multiple customer segments. But problem/solution fit is
only achieved when the revenue model, pricing, and customer acquisition
efforts all match up with the customers’ needs.
Develop the Product for the Few, Not the Many
In existing companies, the goal of traditional product management and
marketing is to develop a market-requirements document (MRD) for
engineering that contains the sum of 
all
 possible customer feature requests,
prioritized in a collaborative effort among Product Management, Marketing,
Sales, and Engineering. Marketing or Product Management hosts focus
groups, analyzes sales data from the field, and looks at customer feature
requests and complaints. This information leads to the adding of requested
features to the product specification, and the engineering team builds them
into the next product release.
While this process is rational for an established company entering an
existing market, it’s folly for startups. Why? Startups aren’t small versions of
large, existing companies where there’s plenty of customer knowledge and
input. In established companies, the MRD process ensures that engineering
will build a product that appeals to existing customers in a known market,
where customers and their needs are known. On a startup’s first day, there’s
limited—if any—customer input for creating a formal product specification.
In a startup, the first product is not designed to satisfy a mainstream
customer. No startup can afford to build a product with every feature a
mainstream customer needs all at once. The product would take years to get
to market and be obsolete by the time it arrived. Instead, successful startups
solve this conundrum by focusing development and early selling efforts on a
very small group of early customers who have bought into the startup’s
vision. These visionary customers will give the company the feedback
necessary to add features to the product over time.
Earlyvangelists are willing to make a leap of faith
and buy an early product.
 
Earlyvangelists:
 The Most Important Customers of
All
Enthusiasts who spread the good news about your product to friends, family
or co-workers are often called evangelists. But a new word is needed to
describe the early adopters—the visionary customers—who buy unfinished
and untested products, because they want to “first,” whether it’s for the sake
of gaining a competitive edge or winning bragging rights. We call these early
adopters 
earlyvangelists
. Unlike “mainstream” business or consumer-product
customers who want to buy a finished, completed, tested product,
earlyvangelists are willing to make a leap of faith and buy an early product
from a startup. Every industry has a small subset of visionaries willing to take
a leap of faith on an early product.
One of the mistakes that startup founders make is to give away or
heavily discount early alpha/beta products to blue-chip customers. In single-
sided markets (where the user is the payer) earlyvangelists will be happy to
pay for early access to the product.
 If they won’t, they aren’t earlyvangelists.
Their willingness to pay is a critical part of the customer discovery process.
You’ll use it to test the entire buying process.

Earlyvangelist Characteristics
 (Figure 2.1)
Earlyvangelists are willing or eager accelerators of
your viral growth.
 
In both physical and web/mobile channels, earlyvangelists display these
common characteristics (see 
Figure 2.1
):
They have a problem or need.
They understand they have a problem.
They’re actively searching for a solution and have a timetable for
finding it.
The problem is so painful that they’ve cobbled together an interim
solution.
They’ve committed, or can quickly acquire, budget dollars to purchase.
Think of earlyvangelists’ characteristics along a scale of customer pain.
Earlyvangelist customers will be found only at the top of the scale—those
who have already been looking for a solution, built a home-grown solution
(whether in a company by building a software solution or at home by taping
together a fork, a light bulb and a vacuum cleaner) and have or can acquire a
budget. These people are perfect earlyvangelist candidates. They can be
relied on for feedback and initial sales; they’ll tell others about the product
and spread the word that the vision is real. Moreover, they can be potential
advisory board candidates (more about advisory boards in 
Chapter 5
).
Build a Minimum Viable Product (
MVP
) First
The idea that a startup builds its product for a small group of initial customers
rather than devising a generic mainstream spec is radical. What follows is
equally revolutionary.
The goal of the MVP is to build the smallest possible
feature set.
 
On the day the company starts, there is very limited customer input. All
the startup has is a vision of what the problem, product and solution seem to
be. Unfortunately, it’s either a vision or a hallucination. The company doesn’t
know who its initial customers are or what features they’ll want. One option
is to start developing an entire full-featured first release of the product, with
every feature the founders can think of. We now know this results in wasted
engineering effort, time and cash, as customers don’t use, want or need most
of the features developed without their input.
Another path is to put Product Development on hold until the Customer
Development team can find customers who can provide adequate feedback.
The risk here is lost time and no product for customers to provide feedback
against. A third, more productive approach is to develop the core features of
the product (incrementally and iteratively with agile engineering methods),
with the feature list driven by the vision and experience of the company’s
founders. 
This is a minimum viable product.
The goal of customer discovery is to test your understanding of the
customer’s problem and see if your proposed solution will prompt him to use
or buy the product based on its most important features alone. Most users
want finished products, but earlyvangelists are the perfect target for the MVP.
Tailor the initial product release to satisfy their needs. If no one thinks your
MVP solution is interesting or sufficient, iterate or pivot until an adequate
number say “yes.”
The shift in thinking to an incremental and iterative MVP as opposed to
a fully featured first product release is important. Engineers tend to make a
product bigger and more perfect. The MVP helps them focus the most
important and indispensable features. Your goal in having an MVP is not to
gather feature requests to change the product or to make the feature set larger.
Instead, the goal is to put the MVP in front of customers to find out whether
you understood the customer problem well enough to define key elements of
the solution. Then you iteratively refine the solution. If, and only if, no
customers can be found for the most important features of the MVP, bring
customers’ additional feature requests to the product development team. In
the Customer Development model, feature requests to an MVP are by
exception and iteration rather than by rule. This eliminates the endless list of
feature requests that often delay first customer ship and drive product
development teams crazy.
Use the Business Model Canvas as The Customer
Discovery Scorecard
Often there’s a lack of a shared and clear understanding of the business
model throughout the company. This customer discovery step uses Alexander
Osterwalder’s 
business model canvas
 to diagrammatically illustrate how a
company intends to make money. As shown in 
Figure 2.2
 the canvas
represents any company in nine boxes, depicting the details of a company’s
product, customers, channels, demand creation, revenue models, partners,
resources, activities and cost structure. (We described the business model
canvas in detail in the 
Customer Development Manifesto
.)
Business Model Canvas
 (Figure 2.2)
In this phase you’ll develop a one- or two-page brief about each of the
following boxes in the business model canvas:
Market Size: how big the opportunity is
Value Proposition, Part 1: the product/service, its benefits and minimum
viable product
Customer Segments: who the customer is and what problems the
product solves
Channels: how the product will be distributed and sold
Customer Relationships: how demand will be created
Value Proposition, Part 2: market-type hypothesis and competitive set/
differentiation
Key Resources: suppliers, commodities, or other essential elements of
the business
Key Partners: other enterprises essential to success of the business
Revenue Streams: revenue and profit sources and size
When you first draft your initial hypotheses your canvas begins to fill
up, looking like 
Figure 2.3
.
Sample Business Model Canvas—Initial Hypotheses
 (Figure 2.3)
But in addition to using the business model canvas as a static snapshot
of the business at a single moment, frozen in time, Customer Development
uses the canvas as a “scorecard” to track progress in searching for a business
model.
Once a week update the canvas to reflect any pivots or iterations,
highlighting in red the changes from the last week.
Then after you and your team agree on the changes to your business
model, integrate them into what becomes your new canvas for the week (the
accepted changes in red are then shown in black). During the next week any
new changes are again shown in red. Then the process repeats each week –
new changes showing up in red. Then a new canvas used for the week.
This method highlights the changes over time for your and the team’s
reference. 
Figure 2.4
 shows how the canvases will look over time.
Using the Business Model Canvas as a Weekly Scorecard
 (Figure 2.4)
Had they read this book, and gotten out of the building, the folks at
Iridium might have saved billions by learning just how small the market for
their business had become. It would have allowed them to search for
alternatives and survival.
To sum up the customer discovery philosophy:
 whether there’s
product/market fit by finding earlyvangelists, understanding their needs, and
verifying that the initial minimum viable product solves a problem they’ll
eagerly pay to have solved. And if not, use near-continuous customer
feedback to drive agile, frequent changes in product and business model
alike.
As you complete the hypothesis development, your business model
canvas quickly becomes multi-dimensional. You are really developing three
initial canvases:
Core elements of the business model itself (value proposition, channel,
etc.)
Hypotheses you have for each element of the business model (such as
“people will want these features, “or “customers will buy our product
because...”)
And a layer outlining the key pass/fail tests you will use to get face-to-
face with customers and use their feedback to convert your hypotheses
into facts.
Overview of Customer Discovery
Customer Discovery: Overview of the Process
 (Figure 2.5)
Customer Discovery has Four Phases
Phase 1
 deconstructs the founders’ vision into the nine parts of the business
model canvas (product, customers, channels, demand creation, revenue
models, partners, resources, activities and cost structure). Then your team
writes one-page briefs about each of the hypotheses, including the list of
experiments or tests you’ll need to conduct to prove or disprove each one.
In Phase 2
 you conduct experiments to test your “problem” hypotheses. This
helps you understand how important the problem is and how big it can
become. You do so by testing most elements of the business model, including
the value proposition, pricing, channel strategy, and sales process. Your goal
is to turn hypotheses into facts or discard them if they’re wrong, and replace
them with new hypotheses. In the process, you’ll gain a deep understanding
of customers’ business, workflow, organization, and product needs. When all
the facts are in, update your results on the canvas.
In Phase 3
, you test your “solution,” presenting your value proposition
(product, pricing, features, and other business model components) and the
minimum viable product to customers and compare their responses to the
“pass/fail” goals you developed earlier. The goal is not to sell the product, but
to validate how well you understood the problem in Phase 2 when you heard
customers say, “Even these minimum features solve our problems,” or, “I
need this product.” Ideally, customers ask, “When can I get it?”
In Phase 4
 you stop and assess the results of the experiments you’ve
conducted and verify that you have:
a full understanding of customers’ problems, passions, or needs
confirmed the value proposition solves problems, passions or needs
determined that a sizable volume of customers exists for the product
learned what customers will pay for the product
made certain the resulting revenue should deliver a profitable business
With your product features and business model validated, decide
whether you have learned enough to go out and try to sell a select your
product to a few visionary customers, or whether you need to go back to
customers to learn some more. If, and only if, you are successful in this step
do you proceed to customer validation.
That’s customer discovery in a nutshell. The remainder of this section
details each of the phases just described.
Now let’s get started.

CHAPTER 3
Customer Discovery, Phase One: State
Your Business Model Hypotheses
T
HE DIAGRAM ABOVE IS AN OVERVIEW OF
 P
HASE
 1
 of customer discovery.
Note that hypotheses for physical products often differ from web/mobile
products. Where the hypothesis issues differ, each is described separately,
physical startups in the upper, lighter-tinted row and web/mobile startup
considerations in the lower, darker row.
This phase starts by developing a rough market size estimate to size the
opportunity for your new venture. Next, the rest of customer discovery uses
the business model canvas to record short summaries (
hypothesis briefs
) of
initial hypotheses about your business. The canvas provides a picture of the
business model on a single page, serving as a reference for team members
and a scorecard keeping track of pivots and iterations as the company’s
business model changes.
The hypothesis briefs provide the detail, but remain short and to the
point, with enough clarity to ensure that all team members understand their
meaning. No hypothesis brief should be more than two pages, and as a rule,
bullet points are far more helpful than paragraphs or even sentences. Almost
every hypothesis concludes with the experiments you’ll use in phases 
2
 and
3
, when you’re out of the building talking to customers to prove or disprove
the hypothesis. Sometimes you’ll even need to get out of the building to do
some research just to figure out what tests to conduct and the kinds of results
to shoot for.
Initially, some briefs may seem shockingly empty. Not to worry—these
briefs serve as an outline. The team will return to them often, filling in the
blanks and modifying original hypotheses with new facts learned along the
way.
Market Size Hypothesis
This brief is an outlier—it doesn’t directly map onto the business model
canvas. But because there’s nothing worse than spending years in a startup
only to discover that it can never grow to more than a few million dollars in
revenue, the market size hypotheses help you size the opportunity of your
startup market. Estimating market size helps determine whether the payoff
from your new venture is worth the toil, sweat and tears, or whether you’re
about to do your first pivot.
Aligning investor and founder objectives clearly at the outset is good
“life insurance” for founders, since few disconnects cost founders their jobs
more quickly than disputes over goals and gold.
...few disconnects cost founders their jobs more
quickly than disputes over goals and gold.
 
The thinking applies regardless of whether it’s in the physical or
web/mobile channel. With one exception: buyable startups founded for a fast
sale to a larger-platform player like Facebook or Google. Buyable startups
should consider the size of what ís often a microsegment of a large market.
Market opportunities are fueled by three ingredients: a large number of
potential active users or customers, clear future-user growth in a market with
rapid and predictable growth, and the opportunity to attract active customers
or users.
TAM, SAM and Target Market
Marketers and their investors typically think of market size as three numbers;
TAM (total addressable market), SAM (served available market) and target
market. The TAM for makers of a new smartphone app might be the 1 billion
total smartphone owners worldwide, but if the application is available only in
English or works only on an iPhone, the SAM or potential market served is
far smaller. And the target market might be Apple App Store customers, so
your next step would be to estimate what percentage of those shoppers might
actually buy. Each estimate further narrows the target market.
TAM
 = how big is the universe
SAM
 = how many can I reach with my sales channel
Target Market
 
(for a startup)
 
=
 who will be the most likely buyers
TAM, SAM and Target Market
 (Figure 3.1)
Estimating TAM and SAM and target market is a good starting point for
the market size hypothesis. Customers will help turn these hypotheses into
facts.
A top-down estimate is a first step. Use industry-analyst reports, market-
research reports, competitors’ press releases, university libraries—and
discussions with investors and customers to “size” the overall market. Use
whatever metric is most appropriate—units, dollars, page views, eyeballs,
whatever.
A note of caution: First-time entrepreneurs are seduced by market size
data from research firms. They should keep in mind that market research
firms are excellent at predicting the past. (If they were geniuses at predicting
the future, they’d be running hedge funds.)
Therefore, a bottom-up estimate is usually more realistic for startups.
Toy makers, for example do this quite easily: there are roughly 2 million girls
born in the U.S. each year, and half can’t afford a $90 doll, so the U.S. target
market for a new doll for girls age 6 to 8 is at most 3 million.
Market research firms are great at predicting the
past.
 
In assessing an 
existing
 or 
re-segmented market
, be sure to consider the
adjacent markets that customers might switch from. Millions of BlackBerry
users traded in their RIM devices when Apple’s iPhone arrived, for example.
Will the startup’s new product have the competitive power to encourage
switching? Count only the switchable subset and beware of long-term
contracts, service contracts, and “sunk costs” like training or installation, all
of which are often hidden barriers to switching.
Of course, nobody can compute a 
new market’s
 size today, since it
doesn’t exist yet. What to do? Estimate the opportunity based on proxies and
adjacent markets. See if there are any comparable companies. Have others
grown as fast as the estimate? Why will this startup perform similarly?
Checklist 3: Market Size
Goal
: Estimate the total market opportunity for the company
Reference
: Chapter 4, Market Size Hypothesis
Estimated market size:
     
  TAM or Total Available Market
     
  SAM or Served Available Market
     
  Target Market
Estimate current product and follow-on products
     
  Appropriate metric for measuring determined
          
  Units/dollars/page views/other measures?
          
  Per member for subscription services/per page view for advertising-
supported businesses?
     
  Research conducted to “size” the overall market
          
  Read industry analyst reports, market research reports, competitors’
press releases, etc.
          
  Talk with investors and customers
     
  If assessing an existing or resegmented market, adjacent markets that
customers might switch from are considered
          
  Will the startup’s product encourage switching?
          
  Only the switchable subset counted (Beware of long-term lock-ins
from incumbents)
          
  Growth computed for all customer sources over 3-5 years
     
  If assessing a new market, the opportunities are estimated based on
proxies and adjacent markets
          
  Are there comparable companies?
          
  Have others grown as fast as the estimate?
          
  Why will this company perform similarly?
Exit criteria
:
  Written sense of market size, estimate of how much the company can
capture
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Value Proposition Hypothesis 
(Part 1)
Start this step by filling out your canvas with the value proposition
hypothesis: the product or service being offered to customers. You’ll include
details about the product, its features and benefits, as well as the company’s
long-term product vision and its initial minimum viable product. Think of the
value proposition as a contract between the customer and your company
where the customer “hires” your startup to solve a problem.
Write a series of briefs that capture the founders’ hours of thinking,
talking, and brainstorming about the product in three separate, specific areas:
Product Vision
Product Features & Benefits
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
The product development team produces much of the product brief, one
of the few times it’s asked to engage in a paper exercise. They put key value
proposition hypotheses down on paper and turn them into briefs agreed to by
all executives..
Product Vision
This portion of the value proposition brief captures your vision for what you
want your successful company to become.
Over time, successful companies are usually more than a single product.
What’s your long-term vision for your company? What do you want to
ultimately change? Are you going to do it with a series of products? How do
you expand into adjacent markets? How do you get people to change
behavior? What’s the world look like three years after you arrive on the
scene? Five years after?
Shape a long-term vision with a short narrative told in bullet points. For
example in the 1990s, a financial software company might have described its
user story this way:
Consumers hate to reconcile their checkbooks
We think we can develop a computer program that emulates a
checkbook.
It will automate all the hard and tedious parts of home banking
Consumers can use it to pay bills by connecting to the Internet
Millions of people will start using home computers to do something they
never did before
Today small businesses use bookkeepers to keep their books
After we succeed in automating consumers we will expand into financial
software for small businesses
Millions of small businesses will start using computers to do something
they never did before
Suddenly, the company vision is clear with a few simple bullet points.
The vision is critical because the Customer Development team has to paint a
picture for earlyvangelists of what the product will look like a year or two
into the future.
Only because earlyvangelists are buying into your
total vision will they spend money for an
incomplete, buggy, barely functional first product.
 
In the long-term vision, the product team specifies the delivery date for
the MVP and for follow-on products or enhancements to the product as far
out as the team can see (18 months to three years). In startups, this request
usually elicits a response like, “How can I come up with future dates when
we barely know the first MVP delivery date?” Reassure your anxious product
development team that this first pass at a schedule isn’t set in stone.
Only because earlyvangelists are buying into your total vision will they
spend money for an incomplete, buggy, barely functional first product.
 The
vision should convince everyone involved that this is an opportunity worth
the investment of millions of dollars and years of work. Ironically, few
startups end up with products that look like their initial vision.
Finally, it’s never too early to think about strategic issues:
Will it create network effects? A single fax machine was useless but
became more valuable as more people acquired them
Can you price it with a predictable pricing model—i.e., subscriptions
versus one-time sales?
Can you create customer lock-in/high switching costs? Think of trying
to get your data from Facebook or from your doctor’s office
Can you have high gross margins?
Does it have organic demand versus marketing spend? Companies with
organic demand have business models that don’t require expensive
marketing. Think Google, eBay, Baidu, Skype, etc.
Product Features and Benefits
This portion of the value proposition brief captures what the product is and
why people will use or buy it.
While many engineers think new products are all about product features,
the product is just one of many elements of a successful startup. The 
product
features list
 is a one-page document consisting of one- or two-sentence
summaries of the top 10 (or fewer) features of the complete product vision.
(If there’s some ambiguity in describing a particular feature, include a
reference to a more detailed engineering document.)
Essentially, the feature list is Product Development’s contract with the
rest of the company. The biggest challenge will be deciding what features
will ship in what order. Developing the MVP will start the prioritization
process. Once you get out of the building, customers will guide the process as
they begin interacting with the earliest version of the MVP.
Think of features as the things engineering is building, and think of
benefits as the problem you’re solving for the customer.
Think of benefits as the problem you’re solving for
the customer.
 
Once you have the feature list, you shape a product 
benefits
 list by
describing the specific product benefits 
as seen through customers’ eyes.
(Something new? Something better? Faster? Cheaper?) Then develop a “user
story.” This short narrative explains 
what job the product will do.
 How will it
solve a problem that customers are eager to fix, or fulfill a need they have?
Ideally, the product solves a mission-critical problem, delivers a compelling,
exciting consumer benefit, or addresses an unspoken need. (Saves money or
time? Relieves a symptom? Fun, relaxing, faster? Better? Cheaper?) A bank-
software company might describe its user story this way:
Customers always face long lines at our bank on Fridays and on the first
and last days of the month when they come in to cash or deposit checks;
they get frustrated and often angry
We think we lose 5 percent to 8 percent of our customers as a result of
frustration
We can measure lost profits of about $500,000 a year, significant
because it’s 7 percent of the total
This $150,000 software package halves the time it takes to make a
deposit and will be even faster in later versions
When thinking about product features, remember that a value
proposition can take the form of a higher-performance product or a less
expensive or more convenient product. It can address a market niche or
segment or solve problems in a new or different, faster or cheaper way.
Sometimes the product’s physical or visual design or even the brand itself
may be different enough to command 
attention. Products don’t always solve
problems, either. While most business products do, consumer goods more
often serve 
needs
 in areas as diverse as online gaming, social networks,
fashion, and cars.
It’s normal for marketers to want to describe the product benefits, but
it’s likely that marketing doesn’t have facts about customers yet, just
opinions. In a startup, the founders and Product Development are likely to be
the ones with the facts. So at this point, the marketing people would be wise
to bite their tongues and listen to the product development group’s
assumptions about the features and exactly how they’ll benefit customers.
These engineering-driven benefits represent hypotheses you’ll test against
real customer facts. In 
Phase 2
, you’ll get out of the building to collect this
feedback directly from customers.
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
The 
MVP
 is the final portion of this first value proposition brief. It’s a
concise summary of the smallest possible group of features that will work as
a stand-alone product while still solving at least the “core” problem and
demonstrating the product’s value.
The MVP is:
a tactic for cutting back on wasted engineering hours
a strategy to get the product into earlyvangelists hands as soon as
possible
a tool for generating maximum customer learning in the shortest
possible time
Start the MVP brief by defining what needs to be learned—and from
whom. Customer Development efforts will engage a very small group of
early visionary and passionate customers to guide product-feature
development until a profitable business model emerges. The sooner the MVP
is in their hands, the sooner feedback can arrive. Rather than asking
customers explicitly about feature X, Y or Z, one approach to defining the
MVP is to ask, “What is the smallest or least complicated problem that the
customer will pay us to solve?”
This approach runs counter to the typical cry for more features, which is
often based on what the competitors have or what the last customer visited
had to say. The MVP is the inverse of what most sales and marketing groups
ask of their development teams.
A goal of Customer Development is to 
understand
what not to ship.
 
Startups tend to collect a list of features that, if added to the product,
would get just that one additional customer to buy. Soon a 10-page feature
list evolves just to sell to 10 customers. That’s a plan for failure. The goal of
Customer Development is 
not
 to collect features from customers. 
It’s to
understand what not to ship
. The perfect feature list is just one paragraph
long and can be sold to thousands or millions of customers. A core tenet of
the Customer Development Manifesto is “less is more.” Minimize the
number of features 
not used
 by getting a MVP into customers’ hands as
quickly as possible. An easy guideline: “no new features until you’ve
exhausted the search for a business model.”
Checklist 4: Product Vision
Goal
: Team agreement on the long-term vision and 18-month schedule
Reference
: Chapter 3, Value Proposition Hypotheses/Product Vision
Vision
     
  What’s your long-term vision for your company?
     
  What do you ultimately want to change or solve?
     
  Are you going to do it with a series of products?
     
  How do you expand into adjacent markets?
     
  Do you need to get people to change their behavior?
     
  What will the world look like 3 years after you arrive on the scene?
Five years?
  
Put together a short narrative in bullets about your strategy
Delivery Dates
     
  MVP Delivery Date and features
     
  18-month product vision and delivery dates
Long Term Product Strategy
     
  Will your product create network effects?
     
  Can you price it with a predicable model?
     
  Can you create customer lock-in/high switching costs?
     
  Can you have high gross margins?
     
  Does it have organic demand versus requiring marketing spend?
     
  List product enhancements anticipated up to 18 months
     
  List key follow-on product enhancements
Exit criteria
:
     
  Vision
     
  Narrative
     
  Long-term product strategy
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Checklist 5: Product Features And Benefits
Goal
: Explain what the product is and why people will buy and use it
Reference
: Chapter 3, Product Features/Benefits Hypothesis
What problem or need are you solving?
     
  What do you think the biggest 
pain
 is in how customers work/play?
     
  If they could wave a magic wand and change anything what would it
be?
     
  How does the product solve those problems or needs?
     
  What do people do today to solve their problem?
Product Feature List
     
  10 one- or two-sentence descriptions of product features
     
  Explain the general goal of the product
     
  Does it address a market niche or segment?
     
  Does it solve a problem or address a need in a new, different, faster or
cheaper way?
Product Benefits List
     
  List the benefits through the customer’s eyes
     
  Something new? Better? More? Faster? Cheaper? Etc.
     
  Underneath the features above, summary benefits for each
     
  Will these Benefits be accepted as such or do they need explanation?
Describe the Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
     
  What do you want to learn?
     
  From who?
     
  What is the smallest feature set?
Create a One-Page User Story
     
  Include product vision, features, benefits
Exit criteria
:
     
  Describe the product’s features and benefits
     
  Describe the MVP
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Customer Segments: Who/Problem Hypothesis
This brief describes who the customers are (the customer types) and what
problems, needs or passions they have. It includes five components:
customer problems, needs or passions
customer types
customer archetypes
a day in the life of customer
organizational map and customer influence map
The Customer Problem, Need or Passion
Products are sold because they solve a problem or fill a need. (See the 
bank
teller story
 in Value Proposition.) Understanding problems and needs
involves understanding their sources. Get out of the building to discover how
customers experience the problem and why (and how much) it matters to
them. Understand the organizational impact problem, and the intensity of
pain it causes the company/family/consumer. Use a simple “problem
recognition scale” for each important type of customer (
Figure 3.2
).
Customers will express:
a 
latent problem:
 they have a problem but don’t know it
a 
passive problem:
 they know of the problem but aren’t motivated or
aware of the opportunity to change
an 
active (or urgent) problem:
 they recognize a problem or passion and
are searching for a solution but haven’t done any serious work to solve
the problem
a 
vision:
 they have an idea for solving the problem and even have
cobbled together a home-grown solution, but are prepared to pay for a
better one
Study the problem. Is your product solving a mission-critical company
problem or satisfying a must-have consumer need? Is your product a must-
have or a nice-to-have? When your product solves a problem that costs
customers sleep, revenue, or profits, things are definitely looking up. When
it’s the hottest “new new thing” in town, whether that town is physical or
virtual, capitalize on the opportunity. The best startups discover a situation
where customers have tried to build a solution themselves—they
simultaneously discover both a mission-critical problem and a customer-
visualized solution. Wow. Now simply convince the customer that if they
build it themselves, they’re detouring into a different, usually non-core
business—
your
 new business!
The best startups discover a situation where
customers have tried to build a solution themselves.
 
Then again, not every product solves problems. Some provide fun or
information, others glamour or romance. Social networks don’t solve
problems but sure have millions of visitors—they fill consumer 
needs and
desires
. Even if it’s fun or pure luxury, recognize that consumers require
justification for a purchase.
After identifying the customer types, craft a hypothesis about their
emotional wants and desires. Describe how to convince these customers that
the product can deliver an emotional payoff: glamour, beauty, wealth,
prestige, a hot date or lost pounds.
Customer Types
Whether a customer is spending time on a social network, buying a stick of
gum, or purchasing a million-dollar telecom system, every sale involves a set
of decision-makers. Thus customer analysis starts with an understanding of
what types of customers to approach. Chances are several people in a number
of categories have problems that your product can solve or needs or
ambitions 
that it can satisfy. Customer discovery identifies and probes these
different needs. Customer types include:
End Users
: The day-to-day users of a product push the buttons, touch the
product, use it, love it, and hate it. A deep understanding of their needs and
motivations is vital, recognizing that the end user may often have the least
influence in the sales or adoption process. This is typically true in complex
corporate sales.
Customer Types
 (Figure 3.2)
Influencers
: At times, the most powerful pressure on a customer’s buying
decisions may not be something the startup did directly but something done
or said by someone who’s uninvolved. In every market or industry, online
and off, a select group of individuals pioneers the trends, styles and opinions.
Ask a famous dress designer when a movie star wears her dress to the Oscars.
Or consider the effect of thousands of people clicking their Facebook “like”
button or Tweeting about a product, ad or service. Sometimes the influencers
are paid bloggers or pundits in market-research firms. They may be kids or
celebrities who wear the latest fashions. 
Include the target list of outside
influencers and address how they’ll be reached. Free product, payments,
celebrity events, free computers and online memberships are among the many
options.
Recommenders
: They influence purchase decisions but differ from
influencers because their opinions can make or break a sale. A recommender
could be a widely read blogger raving about a new online game, a department
head saying any new PCs should come from Dell, a hospital committee
approving a new medical device, or a spouse with a particularly strong brand
preference. It can also be an external force like Gartner Group, Forrester
Research, Martha Stewart or Consumer Reports.
Economic buyers
: They sit further up the decision chain and often control or
approve the purchase or budget. (Important people to know!) They can be
corporate VPs, office managers, insurance companies with issuing
reimbursement codes, teens with allowances, or spouses with vacation
budgets.
Decision-makers
: They may be the economic buyers or reside even higher
up in the decision-making hierarchy. Decision-makers wield the ultimate
purchase authority and are sometimes called UDMs (ultimate decision-
makers) or VITOs (very important top officers) or perhaps “Mom,” “Dad” or
“honey.” Be sure to understand their motivations.
Saboteurs
: They can lurk anywhere (as saboteurs do) and hold titles
including CFO, CIO, child, spouse, or purchasing agent with “friends.” They
can be found in strategic planning departments or in your own home, where
their veto can slow things dramatically. Find them. Identify patterns that
reveal where they’re hiding in the decision process.
Later, during customer validation, knowing all the players in detail will
be essential. For now, simply recognize that the customer is more
complicated than a single individual.
Customer Archetypes
Remember the axiom “A picture is worth a thousand words”? There’s no
better way for the startup team to visualize its customer targets than to take
the time to depict each of the key customer types—the end user and the
decision-maker at a minimum (at least make a few sketches or doodles).
Customer archetypes help the team visualize who will buy or use the product
and helps crystallize product strategy, customer acquisition, and more.
Customer Archetype
 (Figure 3.3)
In a business-to-business sale, does the end user work in an office, a
cubicle or a boiler room? Is he or she a business traveler, a presenter, or a
heads-down number cruncher? Is the decision-maker in a corner office, is she
a scientist in a research lab with a wall lined with prestigious degrees and
awards, or is she on the factory floor?
To understand more about customer archetypes and how they’re used,
review a detailed discussion in the next section, “Customers/Source—
Web/Mobile.” Once you’ve read that, create a comprehensive view of each
key customer archetype, using the data you collected.
Consumer archetypes are generally easier to create than business-to-
business, where relationships are far more complex. Identify as many
hypotheses about the buyer’s demographic and psychographic profile as
possible. Is the buyer affluent, fashion-conscious, healthy and active?
Married with pets and toddlers or teens? In a house, an apartment, or a trailer
park? These characteristics will influence many aspects of the business
model, including customer relationships, channel, and revenue model.
A Day in the Life of a Customer
One of the most powerful ways to understand your customers, whether
they’re consumer or business customers, is to discover how they “work” and
write it down, delineating a day in their life.
...discover how customers “work” and write it
down, delineating a day in their life.
 
In the case of businesses, this step requires a deep understanding of a
target company on many levels. Let’s use selling software to a bank as an
example. How a bank works isn’t something you’ll discover by cashing a
check. You want to know how the world looks from a banker’s perspective.
To begin with, how do the potential end users of the product (the tellers)
spend their days? What products do they use? How much time do they spend
using them? How would life change for these users after they have your
product? Unless you’ve been a bank teller, these questions should leave you
feeling somewhat at a loss, but how are you going to sell a product to a bank
to solve tellers’ problems if you don’t understand how they work?
(If you’re not an experienced salesperson, this whole notion of getting
out of the building can sound intimidating. The 
“Get Out of the Building”
section of customer discovery,
 Chapter 4, describes how to set up your first
meetings.)
Now run this exercise from the perspective of branch managers. How do
they spend their day? How would your new product affect them? Run it
again, this time 
thinking about bank presidents. What on earth do they do?
What do they read? Who influences their decisions? How will your product
affect her? And if you’re installing a product that connects to other software
the bank has, you’re going to have deal with the IT organization. How do the
IT people spend their day? What other software do they run? How are their
existing systems configured? Who are their preferred vendors? Are they
standing at the door with confetti and Champagne waiting to welcome yet
another new company with yet another product?
The answers are easy. Asking the right questions is
hard.
 
Business products are generally purchased because they solve problems,
so a deep understanding of the buyer is required. If you’re selling a retailer
point-of-sale tools, for example, can someone on your team work behind a
busy counter for a few days? There’s no better way to understand than to dive
in. Learn how prospective users currently solve their problems, online or off,
and how they’d do it differently using the new product. What will motivate
these customers to buy? Draw a vivid and specific picture of a day in the life
of the customer, and do the research in the same place where they do their
work or have their fun, not in the company conference room or alone at a
local Starbucks.
Finally, back to our banking example, do you know about trends in the
banking industry? Is there a banking-industry software consortium? Are there
bank software trade shows? Industry analysts? Unless you’ve come from
your target industry, this part of your customer-problem brief may include
little more than lots of question marks. That’s OK. In customer development,
the answers turn out to be easy; it’s asking the right questions that’s difficult.
You’ll be going out and talking to customers with the goal of filling in all the
blank spots on the customer-problem brief.
For a consumer product, the same exercise is applicable. How do
consumers solve their problems today? How would they solve their problems
with your product? Would they be happier? Smarter? Feel better? Do you
understand what will motivate these customers to buy?
Your final exam doesn’t happen until you come back to the company
and, in meetings with the product development team and your peers, draw a
vivid and specific picture of a day in the life of your customer.
A Sample Organizational/Influence Map
 (Figure 3.4)
Organizational/Influence Maps
Now having a deeper understanding of a customer’s typical day, you realize
that except in rare cases, most customers don’t work by themselves.
Consumers interact with friends and family, while businesspeople interact
with their colleagues. List the people who could influence a customer’s
buying decisions and draw a tentative diagram of the prospective customer
and all the influences surrounding him or her. Also depict the product’s
impact on their day-to-day work or personal life. Then build a map showing
potentially influential people who surround the user. At a large company, the
diagram will be complex, with lots of initial unknowns.
Checklist 6: Customer Segments
Goal
: Develop a hypothesis of who your customers are and what problems
they have that will drive them to use your product
Reference
: Chapter 3, Customer Segments
Define the Customer Problem
     
  Does the customer have a latent, passive, active or vision
problem/need?
Define the Customer type
     
  Define the distinctly different types of “customer”
     
  Who will be the actual day-to-day users of the product?
     
  Who are the influencers and recommenders?
     
  Who is the “Economic Buyer”? (i.e. whose budget will pay for it?)
     
  Do you think the Economic Buyer has an existing budget for this
product or do they need to get one approved?
     
  Who are the “Decision Makers?”
     
  Who else needs to approve the purchase? And who can kill it?
What are the Customer’s wants and needs?
     
  Rated on a “problem recognition scale”
     
  Does product solve a mission-critical company problem or satisfy a
must-have customer need?
     
  How painful is this problem?
  
Draw the Customer Archetypes
  
Draw the Day in the life of a customer – before and after your product
Draw the Organizational and customer influence maps
     
  List those who could influence a customer’s buying decision
     
  Consider the product’s influence on his daily life
Exit criteria
:
     
  Customer types and problem or need
     
  Customer archetypes
     
  Depict a day in the life of a customer
     
  Organizational and customer influence maps
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Channels Hypothesis
The channel brief describes how the product gets from company to
customers.
The difference between physical and web/mobile channels is dramatic.
In one, physical goods move from a loading dock to a customer or a retail
outlet. In another, no human involvement is required, as the product is
offered and sold online. (If the product itself is bits, it’s both sold and
delivered online.)
Physical channels have been around for centuries. They’re an
“intermediate customer” the startup has to deal with, and the barriers can be
significant: high cost, long lead times, lack of control, and lack of promotion,
to name a few. However, the rewards can be great. In the 20
th
 century,
physical distribution was especially important. Back then, the pinnacle of
distribution was to be sold at Walmart, which welcomes 20 million
Americans every day.
Consider whether your product fits the channel.
 
Most companies use both web/mobile and physical channels today. For
example, even with some 10,000 massive physical stores, Walmart also
invests heavily in 
walmart.com
, an alternate channel, as most national
retailers do. Most channel strategies, particularly for physical goods, today
involve both physical and web/mobile channels. Whether a company uses a
physical or web channel, it must generate customer demand and drive it into
the sales channel. Physical and web channels employ very different demand-
creation activities.
Consider Whether Your Product “Fits” the
Channel
Different sales channels support different product price bands. For example, a
salesperson selling enterprise software needs to bring in more than $1.5
million in annual revenue. On the other hand, few Smartphone applications
sell for more than $10, minus the typical 30 percent app-store fee. Other e-
tailers such as Amazon and 
bestbuy.com
 regularly sell products for hundreds
if not thousands of dollars, sometimes keeping as much as half the gross
revenue for themselves.
Be sure to factor all channel costs into the pricing hypothesis, since
many channels charge for distribution, promotion, and even sometimes for
placing products on the shelves or returning unsold merchandise to the
company. Channel selection changes the company’s revenue model, often
dramatically, so be sure to revisit and update the revenue stream hypothesis
based on the company’s costs and net revenue when making the channel
selection. (Always compute the revenue stream on a “net” basis, reflecting
only revenue that will arrive in company coffers once the dust settles.)
Physical Channel Choices
Each physical distribution channel has its own unique set of strengths,
weaknesses and costs. Some channels are “indirect,” with a company selling
to intermediaries sometimes called “resellers” (distributors, value-added
resellers, dealers, etc.), who then sell to an end user. For example, when a
handheld video-game maker wants to use local independent toy stores as a
channel, those toy stores buy merchandise from a local or national distributor.
Your company calls on the distributor but can’t possibly afford to visit every
independent toy store in America. In general, physical distribution is as
complex as it is costly. Here are some of the most common alternatives.
Direct sales
: These are salespeople you employ to either call on end users
(consumers or businesses) or sell to other resellers.
     
Strengths:
 superb oversight and control; sales force focused on/dedicated
to your company’s products.
     
Weaknesses:
 Most expensive alternative; hard to find great talent and even
more difficult to manage. The product price/margin may not support the
expense.
Physical Distribution Channel Choices
 (Figure 3.5)
Independent sales-rep firms
: Independent salespeople represent multiple
companies to a particular channel or chain, generally on a geographic basis
(although some rep firms are national). They typically handle compatible but
not competing product lines. They often work on commission, less often on
retainer or a per-sale fee.
     
Strengths:
 Fast way to get national distribution at a variable cost with little
upfront spending.
     
Weaknesses:
 They’re loyal to their customer, not to you, the selling
company; they’re more of a conduit than a proactive marketer.
Systems integrators/value-added resellers (VARs)
: Unlike independent
sales-rep firms, systems integrators/VARs add value to the products they sell
(consulting, installation, or integration of additional products from other
manufacturers). These organizations sell principally in technology industries
in business-to-business sales. Systems integrators can be as small as a one- or
two-man local IT consultant or vast global networks like Accenture and IBM.
     
Strengths:
 Fast way to get national distribution and “whole product
integration and installation” at a variable cost with no upfront cost to the
company.
     
Weaknesses:
 They’re loyal to their customer, not to you; they are more a
conduit than a proactive marketer. They require immense care and
feeding such as promotional effort, hand-holding, training and incentives
and as a rule are challenged to organize into a consistent national
footprint and harder still to motivate.
Distributors/Resellers
: Mid- and low-volume business and consumer
products are often sold through distributors—intermediaries between
manufacturer and retailer who do little more than stock the product locally
and make it available in modest quantities to local stores. Some distributors
(think CDW for computers, Arrow for electronic components, McKesson for
pharmaceuticals) are national in scope and carry literally thousands of items.
It’s difficult and costly to get a distributor to promote a particular product.
     
Strengths:
 They provide personal attention and can showcase and promote
products they like.
     
Weaknesses:
 Expensive. Generally have an “order taker” mentality and
are rarely marketing/promotion partners. They may have the rights to
return your product. Typically don’t pay until the product is “sold
through.”
Dealers (aka Retailers)
: Unlike a distributor, a dealer has bought the
product. Whether they’re selling to businesses or consumers, dealers are
usually independent retailers or small chains that display and promote what’s
generally a limited selection of products. Typically, they take a large markup
(often double their cost, called a “keystone”) on the wholesale price to
compensate for higher operating costs and 
smaller volumes. Dealers seldom
deal directly with “the factory” (your company), instead buying goods from a
distributor or similar intermediary, in more modest quantities than, say,
Costco. Consumer products are also still sold in “mom-and-pop” food and
convenience stores.
     
Strengths:
 They provide personal attention and can showcase and promote
products they like.
     
Weaknesses:
 It’s hard and costly to build a new business using dealers as
the principal channel.
Mass merchandisers
: In the U.S., national chains from Walmart to Costco
and Home Depot to 7-Eleven move massive amounts of merchandise to
consumers. As a result, they wield enormous influence over manufacturers
and extract their “pound of flesh” by often charging 50 percent of the retail
price for carrying the product. They seldom launch new products without a
successful “test market” in a modest number of stores. And when that test
succeeds, the retailer asks for “slotting allowances” in the tens of thousands
of dollars (in addition to their markup) for agreeing to display the product.
     
Strengths:
 Massive distribution and advertising/marketing potential.
     
Weaknesses:
 Long lead time to sell into (at times a year or more),
extremely high cost, little marketing control and less opportunity to
influence. May have the right to return unsold product months later. Pay
painfully slowly, sometimes taking six months or more.
Original Equipment Manufacturers
: OEMs buy a product to make it part
of their larger product. A PC maker buys hard drives, semiconductors, circuit
boards and keyboards from scores of manufacturers and assembles those
products into a larger, usually more complex product for sale to end users.
Issues a startup should consider:
The startup’s brand, image and identity are subsumed by the OEM and
often invisible to the end user. (“Intel inside” is a rare exception where the
component’s brand and reputation add value); your startup’s success depends
completely 
on the success of the OEM’s product, not the startup’s; and the
OEM’s sense of customer needs, issues, and reactions can obscure the
startup’s understanding of customer needs.
     
Strengths:
 Massive volume potential.
     
Weaknesses:
 Typically low-margin; no “branding benefit” or visibility for
your startup.
Which Channel Should I Use?
A tragic mistake many startups make is to overreach on initial channel
efforts. Until the company completes customer validation, it should pick a
sales channel representing the greatest potential and focus on it to the
exclusion of all others. Your company is still testing and expanding its
hypotheses and needs to focus on learning. Don’t try to launch a product via
direct sales, chain stores and direct mail all at once—it’s almost impossible to
succeed at all three. The big exception, of course: physical-channel launches
with simultaneous web-marketing (and sometimes sales) support.
Decisions about channel and pricing are interrelated, so develop the
channel hypothesis while working simultaneously on the 
revenue and pricing
hypothesis
. For example, retail distribution cuts the company’s revenue
dramatically while direct sales may deliver more sales dollars but do so more
slowly. When considering which channels to adopt, keep these criteria in
mind:
Are there established buying habits/practices in the product category?
Does the channel strengthen the sales process? At what cost to the
company?
What are the price and complexity issues surrounding sale of the
product?
Startups seldom get the channel strategy right the first time. Most
technology startups, for example, assume that a direct sales force is the way
to go, a hypothesis that’s often proved wrong. It’s almost always smartest—
and safest—to first observe existing buying patterns and habits for similar
products and product categories, since customers are demonstrating their
preferred channel by spending their money there.
Checklist 7: Channels
Goal
: Develop a hypothesis of your distribution channel
Reference
: Chapter 3, Physical and Channel Hypotheses
  
What channel will your users use to buy from you?
Draw the Distribution Channel Diagram
     
  How much will the channel cost (direct expenses or channel discounts)
     
  Are there indirect channel costs (presales support, promotional
dollars...)
     
  What else is needed for customers to use/buy the product?
     
  How do they acquire those pieces?
     
  What is the net revenue after channel costs?
Is this a Multi-sided Market?
     
  How will you address each side of the market?
Exit criteria:
     
  Distribution channel selected
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Value Proposition 2: Market-Type and Competitive
Hypothesis
The market-type brief describes which of the four market types the company
fits into. (Refer to 
Chapter 1, Rule 7,
 in the Customer Development
Manifesto.) It also adds a competitive brief.
Regardless of the channel they choose, startups adopt (or pursue) one of
four market types. The consequences of choosing the wrong market type are
severe (prematurely burning cash on marketing and sales before it’s needed),
but unlike decisions about product features, the market-type choice is a “late-
binding” decision. While a final decision can be deferred until customer
creation, it’s wise to develop and test an initial market-type hypothesis while
moving through the customer discovery phase. In the next chapters, we’ll
come back to the market type selection process many times, and refine and
deepen the analysis after further discussing customers and market.
In this brief, seek a provisional answer to just one question: is the
company entering an existing market, re-segmenting an existing market,
creating a new market or cloning a market?
Market type drives marketing spending, sales
timing and cash need.
 
Market Type
For some startups, the market-type choice is pretty clear. When entering a
market that has a ton of competitors, whether it’s smartphones, social
networks, glucose 
meters or airplanes, the choice has already been made for
you: it’s an existing market. On the other hand, if your company invents a
new class of product no one has ever seen before, it’s most likely in a new
market. However, most companies have the luxury of choosing which market
type to use. So how to make the decision? A few simple questions begin the
process:
Is there an established, well-defined market with large numbers of
customers? Do customers know the name of the market and do
competitors exist? Does the product have an edge (better performance,
features, service) over competitors? If so, it’s an existing market
Would some part of an existing market buy a product designed to
address its specific needs? Even if it cost more? Or even if it had worse
performance in an aspect of the product irrelevant to this niche? If so,
think re-segmented market/niche strategy
Another type of re-segmentation answers the question: Are there
customers at the low end of an existing market who will buy “good
enough” performance if they can get it at a substantially lower price? If
yes, think re-segmented market/low-cost strategy
Without an established and well-defined market, there are obviously no
existing customers or competitors and a new market is being created
Startups in Russia, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Japan and China (where
they have large local markets and language and cultural barriers) have
an additional market type: the clone market. Can you adopt/borrow/copy
an already-successful business model and company from the U.S. and
adapt it to local language and buying preferences. (Not too long from
now, ideas from those countries will be cloned in the U.S.)
When you talk to customers, they’ll have lots of opinions about where
the product fits. Don’t worry about wavering among the market-type choices.
For now, just look at each market type and pick the one that best fits the
company’s vision today. 
Table 3.1
 summarizes of the trade-offs.
Market Type Trade-Offs
 (Table 3.1)
One of the best tools for sorting out existing market entry strategies is
derived from military operations research. It suggests a few simple rules that
companies can use to analyze an 
existing market:
If a single company has 74 percent of the market, the market has
become an effective monopoly. For a startup, that’s an unassailable
position for a head-on assault. (Think Google in search or Facebook in
social networks.)
If the combined market share for the market leader and the second-
ranking company is greater than 74 percent and the first company is
within 1.7 times the share of the second, it means a duopoly commands
the market. Its position is impervious to attack by a startup. (In the
telecom sector, Cisco’s and Juniper’s combined share of the core router
market fits this description.)
If a company has 41 percent market share and at least 1.7 times the
market share of the next-largest company, it’s the market leader.
For a startup, this too is a very difficult market to enter. Markets with a
clear market leader offer an opportunity for re-segementation.
If the biggest player in a market has at least a 26 percent market share,
the market is unstable, with a strong possibility of abrupt shifts in the
company rankings. Here there may be some existing market entry
opportunities.
If the biggest player has less than 26 percent market share, it has no real
influence on the market. Startups that want to enter an existing market
find these the easiest to penetrate.
If you decide to attack a market that has just one dominant player, you
need to be prepared to spend three times the combined sales and marketing
budget of that dominant player. (Ouch—so much for going head-on with
Google or Facebook.)
In a market that has multiple participants, the cost of entry is lower, but
you still need to spend 1.7 times the combined sales and marketing budget of
the company you plan to attack. (To enter an existing market, you must steal
market share from an incumbent, hence the war analogy.) 
Table 3.2
summarizes the existing market cost of entry.
Market Type—Cost of Entry
 (Table 3.2)
Competition in an Existing Market
Now that you understand the type of market you’re in, the competitive
landscape becomes clearer. If you believe your company and product fit into
an existing market, you need to understand how your product outperforms
your competitors’. In an existing market the customers can tell you what the
basis of competition is. It nearly always has to do with key product attributes,
but sometimes it’s other components of the business model—e.g., channel or
price. Strive for a product or feature or improvement that can get a customer
to say, “I’ll pay anything for that.”
Positioning the product against the slew of existing competitors is
accomplished by adroitly selecting the basis of competition 
where you can
win.
 Remember it’s not always features. It can be convenience, services,
brand, etc., where the new entry is clearly better. Summarize the thinking in a
brief. When entering an existing market, good questions to address in the
brief include:
Who are the incumbents and which ones drive the market?
What is the market share of each competitor?
How many marketing and sales dollars will the market leaders spend to
compete?
What will the cost of entry be against incumbent competitors?
What performance attributes have customers said are important? How
do competitors define performance?
What share of this market does the company want to capture in the first
three years?
How do the competitors define the market?
Are there existing standards? If so, whose agenda is driving the
standards?
Does the company seek to embrace these standards, extend them, or
replace them? (If the answer is to extend or replace them, this may
indicate a re-segmented market.) When you enter an existing market,
though, also fill out the competitive brief discussed later in this section
to shape the positioning further
One way to plan your attack in an existing market is to refer to your
business model canvas. What jobs are your customers asking your product to
fill? What problem is your value proposition solving?
Re-segmenting an Existing Market
In an existing market, your startup is the weakest player with the least
resources. Therefore, attacking the strongest players head-on is foolish. You
want to choose strategies that acknowledge your weaknesses and play to your
agility. If there’s a dominant player with more than 74 percent market share,
don’t attack that market head-on. Why? Because you need three times the
resources of the market leader. Instead, target your attack at the point where
your limited resources can make a difference. You’ll segment the existing
market to create a submarket where your product can be unique or
substantially different. Or if you can create a new market, you can define a
space the market leader doesn’t address at all.
If your enemy is superior in strength, evade him. If
angry irritate him. Pretend to be weak, that he may
grow arrogant.
 
If the dominant player has between 26 percent and 74 percent market
share, pick your battles carefully. Remember the cost of a head-on attack:
three times the budget of a single competitor or 1.7 times that of a competitor
in a crowded market.
Most startups don’t have access to those financial resources. Therefore,
re-segmenting the market or creating a new market is almost always the
default when faced with a dominant incumbent. All the marketing tricks for
nipping at the heels of an entrenched competitor can be used here. Most of
them were invented 2,500 years ago by Sun Tzu and described in his book
The Art of War.
 Paraphrasing about: “All warfare is based on deception. If
your enemy is superior evade him. If angry irritate him. If equally matched,
fight, and if not, re-evaluate”.
Your goal is to become No. 1 in something important to your customer.
It could be product attribute, territory, distribution chain/retailer, or customer
base. Keep segmenting the market (by age, income, region, etc.) and focusing
on the competitors’ weak points until you have a battle you can win.
Remember, any company can take customers away from any other company
—if it can define the battle. When re-segmenting an existing market,
positioning rests on either:
     (a)  finding a unique niche where some product feature or service
redefines the market, creating a clear competitive advantage
     (b)  being the “low-cost provider” or
     (c)  combining differentiation and lower operating cost into a Blue Ocean
Strategy that creates an uncontested market space and makes the
competition irrelevant while creating and capturing new demand.
Southwest Airlines was among the first to re-segment air travel this
way, followed by many copycat failures and much later by JetBlue.
Cirque du Soleil is an example of a Blue Ocean re-segmentation,
offering product differentiation as well as lower operating costs
In an existing market, your startup is the weakest
player with the least resources.
 
When re-segmenting for a unique niche, address these questions in this brief:
What existing markets are customers coming from?
What are the unique characteristics of those customers?
What compelling needs of those customers are unmet by existing
suppliers?
What compelling product features will get customers to abandon their
current suppliers?
Why couldn’t existing companies offer the same thing?
How long will it take you to grow a market of sufficient size? What
size?
How will the company educate the market and create demand?
Given that no customers yet exist in the new segment, what are realistic
sales forecasts?
How can this forecast be tested?
Can parts of the business model be changed to differentiate the
company?
For this type of startup, draw a “market map” (a diagram of how this
new market will look) as shown in 
Figure 3.6
, to illustrate why the company
is unique. Draw the market map with the startup in the center. A re-
segmented market assumes that customers flow from an existing market(s).
Draw the existing markets that customers should flow from (remember that a
market is a set of companies with common attributes). Draw the product
features and functions that, when assembled, best describe the new product
(think Hershey bar, now with peanut butter and zero calories—each attribute
draws different customer groups).
Example of a Market Map
 (Figure 3.6)
When re-segmenting based on low cost, questions to address include:
What existing markets are customers coming from?
What are the unique characteristics of those customers?
What price will it take (known as “switching cost”) to get those
customers to spend time online with or buy from the new company?
What features are customers willing to give up to get the lower price?
How can this hypothesis be tested quantitatively?
Finally, visualize why thousands of new customers will believe in and
move to this market. And beware the “low-price provider” re-segmentation,
since competitors can reprice in a matter of days if not hours, eviscerating the
positioning that everyone just bet the new business on.
What could be better than a market with no
competitors?
 
Entering a New Market
What if there are no competitors? What if, after talking to all your early
customers, you continue to hear, “There’s nothing else like what your
company is offering”? What if, after looking at all the quantitative data, you
can’t find other companies with comparable products? Congratulations—
you’re creating a new market. At first 
glance, a new market has great appeal.
A standing joke is that every new market has its own descriptive TLA (three-
letter acronym). What could be better than a market with no competitors?
And absence of competition typically means that pricing isn’t a competitive
issue but an issue of what the market will bear. Wow, no competitors and
high margins!
A company creating a new market is a radically different type of
company from one entering or reframing an existing market. While there are
no market-share battles with competitors, there are also no existing
customers. If there are no existing customers, even an infinite demand-
creation budget at the point of product launch won’t garner market share.
Creating a new market is about long-term customer education and adoption.
New-market entries are by far the most expensive demand-creation
challenges, particularly since the marketer can’t say “tastier than Yummies”
or “faster than Porsche” or “cheaper than Brand X,” since no such
comparables exist. At the risk of sounding pedantic, creating a new market
means a market doesn’t currently exist—there are no customers. When
entering a new market, good questions to address include:
What are the markets adjacent to the new one being created?
What markets will potential customers come from?
What’s the company’s vision and why will lots of people care?
What “never could have been done before” will make customers
use/buy?
How long will it take to educate potential customers to grow a market of
sufficient size? What size is that?
How will the company educate the market? How will it create demand?
Given that no customers yet exist, what are realistic sales forecasts for
the first three years?
How much financing will it take to soldier on while educating and
growing the market?
What will stop a well-heeled competitor from taking over the market
once the startup develops it? (This phenomenon is the source of the
phrase “Pioneers are the ones with arrows in their backs.”)
Is the product better-defined as one that will re-segment a market or
enter an existing one?
New-market entries are by far the most expensive...
 
Companies compete in new markets not by besting other companies
with product features but by convincing a set of customers that the new
company’s market vision is real and solves a real problem a different way. A
few classic examples: Snapple, Toyota Prius, Siebel, Groupon, and
Facebook. However, who the users are, and the definition of the market itself
are both clearly unknown. This brief defines the new market and its users
with the startup at the center.
One last thing to consider: startups creating new markets won’t create a
market of sufficient size to generate a profit until three to seven years from
product launch. This sobering piece of data is derived from looking at the
results of hundreds of high-tech startups of the last twenty years. While you
may be convinced your startup is the exception, the odds say that unless
you’re in a “bubble economy,” it takes time for new ideas and products to
diffuse and catch on. (A bubble economy is defined as a time of irrational
exuberance in a market when all normal rules are repealed.)
Market type, in summary
: Market type is one of the most important choices
founders need to make and agree on with investors, since it drives spending,
timing and competitive analysis. The choice doesn’t need to be made during
customer discovery, but an initial hypothesis is needed. If investors are
expecting substantial revenue in Year One, thinking they’ve invested in an
existing-market company, the outcome is typically a new CEO. Market type
selection drives spending and budget as well as revenue expectations.
Competitive Brief
Once you understand your market type, it’s relatively simple to assemble a
competitive brief. This will help you understand how you’ll compete in the
market.
When entering an existing market or re-segmenting one, your first
instinct may be that the basis of competition is simply the product features of
your value proposition. That may be, but you may be missing a bigger
competitive advantage. Is there something about partners, the channel,
resources, etc. that would be a game changer? Think of Apple and the
original iPod. It combined a hardware player, which lots of vendors had, with
an easy-to-use software application, iTunes, which no one had (but others
could have built) and then added partners at the record labels (which required
Steve Jobs’ reality-distortion field). The business model canvas is a perfect
vehicle for brainstorming some of these ideas.
In a new market, it’s tempting to say, “We have no
competition.” But you’ll be wrong.

 
Explain how and why your new product is better than its competitors.
Other items the competitive brief should consider:
How have existing competitors defined the basis of competition? Is it in
terms of product attributes? Service? What are their claims? Features?
What makes the new company and its product stand out as dramatically
different? Features? Performance? Price?
Will customers care if the new product lets them do something they
couldn’t do before?
In a retail store, which competitive products will be shelved next to the
new entry?
For web/mobile apps, assess competitors’ product quality, features, sales
or user data, and traffic levels.
What’s strongest about each competitor’s product? What do current
customers like most about those existing products? What would
customers change about them?
What is a customer’s “reason to buy” or use the product, app, or site?
And which competitors will they abandon to do so, and why?
If you’re in a new market, it’s tempting to say, “We have no
competition.” But you’ll be wrong. The new product itself may not yet exist,
but what do people do today without it? Do they simply not do something, or
do it badly or inefficiently? What will your new product enable them to do
that they couldn’t do before. Why will they care?
It’s only natural that startups compare themselves with other startups
around them, but it’s important to remember a key tenet of Customer
Development: Don’t make a list of all competitors’ features to simply make a
bigger list. A few incremental features or improvements seldom result in a
great, scalable company. What’s more, in their first few years, startups
seldom put one another out of business.
Winners understand why customers buy.
 
While startups compete for funding and technical resources, 
winners
understand why customers buy. The losers never do.
 Competitive analysis
starts at why customers will buy and then looks at the whole market,
including new and established competitors.
Checklist 8: Market Type
Goal
: Select an initial Market Type
Reference
: Chapter 3, Market Type
  
Do you have a new product in an existing market?
  
Do you want to clone an existing market?
  
Do you need to redefine/reframe a market?
  
Or do you want to create an entirely new market?
     
  Is your product/service a substitute for something customers already
have?
     
  Is it a replacement?
     
  Is it a variant on something already out there, but can be “respun” into
something new?
     
  Is it something totally new?
Positioning in An Existing Market
     
  Define the basis of competition
     
  Who is driving the existing market?
     
  Do you have some advantage or appeal among any vertical or
horizontal market segment?
Positioning in An Existing Market you Want to Resegment
     
  Define the basis of the how you want to change the market
     
  Who is driving the existing market you want to resegment?
Positioning in a New Market
     
  How will you create the market
     
  Estimate of market creation costs
Exit criteria:
     
  A preliminary first hypothesis of the type of market
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
This is not the time to broadly launch your product to a wide audience or
get a ton of press. (You’ll be under enormous peer pressure to do so.)
 
Customer Relationships Hypothesis
This customer-relationship brief describes how you 
get
 customers into your
sales channel, 
keep
 them as customers and 
grow
 additional revenue from
them over time.
The “Get, Keep, Grow” Funnel in Physical Channels
 (Figure 3.7)
While 
Figure 3.7
 illustrates the flow through the process, 
Table 3.3
provides an overview of the most widely used activities, by channel, for each
step in the “get, keep, grow” process. In this hypothesis we’ll focus on the
column on the left: the physical channel.
Every company, whether its product or channel is physical or
web/mobile, can summarize its mission in three succinct phrases: build great
products; “get, keep, and grow” customers; and make money directly or
indirectly from these customers. Customer relationships are the strategies and
tactics to 
get, keep and grow
 customers.
Getting
 customers, sometimes called demand creation, drives customers
into your chosen sales channel(s).
Keeping
 customers, or retention, gives customers reasons to stick with
the company and product.
Growing
 customers involves selling them more of what they’ve bought
as well as new and different products and encourages them to refer new
customers.
“Get, Keep and Grow” are among the most
important hypotheses for any startup.
 
“Get, keep and grow” are among the most important hypotheses for any
startup. You will die without customers and these are most expensive parts of
any company. The diagram in 
Figure 3.7
 provides an overview of the entire
customer relationship life cycle. This hypothesis will “dissect” the diagram,
starting on the left from “awareness,” the first step, and proceeding through
each of the many steps in the “get, keep, grow” process.
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 There is no way you can implement all
this or even process it in one sitting. What follows is an overview of all
the things you need to consider as you shape a marketing strategy that’s
best for your startup.
 
Developing Customer Relationships in the Physical
Channel
Customer Relationship Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.3)
Think of the “get customers” process as a “funnel” in which the greatest
number of potential customers—those on the left—have awareness of the
product. The number of potential customers declines as their interest grows,
as they consider buying, and then as they make the actual purchase. During
customer discovery, you’ll launch a series of small-scale, inexpensive “get
customers” experiments to determine the tactics that move customers into and
through the funnel in a repeatable, scalable, and cost-effective way. Later,
once you have customers, you’ll begin customer retention activities to 
keep
the customers and use upselling, cross-selling and customer referral programs
to 
grow
 the number of customers and the revenue.
“Get Customers”
Getting customers, or demand creation, has four distinct stages in the
physical channel: 
awareness, interest, consideration,
 and 
purchase
. See
Figure 3.8
.
The “Get Customers” Funnel for Physical Goods
 (Figure 3.8)
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 There is no way you can implement all
these alternatives at once or even process them in one sitting. What
follows is an overview of all the things you need to consider as you
shape a marketing strategy that’s best for you.
 
Awareness
 lets potential customers know about your product or service
(think TV commercials shouting “new airline” or radio ads saying, “Now you
can fly cheaper”). It gets people thinking about the product or service.
Interest
 means the message is no longer being ignored even if the
prospect isn’t ready to act. Think of people saying, “I should try one of those
low-cost airlines sometime,” as a result of the initial awareness effort. One
more push could move this prospect to the consideration step.
Consideration
 follows interest when the message is powerful enough or
contains a convincing offer that might lead to the thought, “Why don’t I take
JetBlue on my trip to Florida next month?” Consideration may take the form
of a free trial where it’s offered.
Purchase
 follows consideration. It’s clearly the desired result of “get”
activities.
Creating demand for a consumer electronics product sold on Walmart’s
shelves is different from opening a chain of pizza parlors or selling a new
type of semiconductor. And while the description of customer relationship
activities may seem simple at first, it’s actually the result of a complex
interplay among customers, the sales channel, the value proposition and the
budget for marketing activities. When you get it right, it all comes together in
a repeatable, scalable, profitable business model.
Develop Your “Get Customers” Strategy
Earned and Paid Media Feeding the “Get Customers” Funnel
(Figure 3.9)
The first three funnel stages—awareness, interest, and consideration—happen
in the consumer’s mind, out of reach of anything other than your advertising
messages. The first two stages—awareness and interest—are out of your
control until the customer identifies herself or himself to some channel like a
retailer, a direct-sales rep, or a website and says, “I’m interested.” (This could
happen when the customer leaves a business card at a trade show, requests
more information online, or talks with a company representative.) The “get
customers” activity moves customers as far into the funnel as possible until
the customer self-identifies and the channel takes over the “consideration”
and “purchase” activity. But it all starts with awareness.
“Get Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.3a)
An important caution: be aware of the way the physical-channel has
changed in the past decade.
 Whether a product is sold at a car dealership, a
gravel pit, a 7-Eleven or the trendiest retail boutique, 21st-century consumers
begin their search for products online. So online marketing is every bit as
important to marketers in the physical channel as it is to their web
counterparts. Your job as a marketer is to be sure customers can easily find
your product or service on the web. This means that physical-channel
marketers need to pay almost as much attention to the next section of this
chapter—
“Web/Mobile Customer Relationships”
—as they pay to this one.
(For best results, read both sections before beginning the tasks outlined
here.) Marketers in the physical channel must embrace basic web-marketing
tactics at every opportunity—websites, AdWords, online advertising—even
in the unlikely event that your product isn’t for sale online. Online, your job
is to “pull” customers 
to your product so they can discover it online, even if
they then buy it at your warehouse, at Walmart or face-to-face from a sales
representative.
Awareness, interest, and consideration in the physical channel are
primarily driven by two types of communication tactics: 
earned (or free)
media
 and 
paid media
.
Earned media
 is the free exposure a company generates. In the physical
channel, it includes press releases, product reviews, editorial features and a
range of “guerrilla marketing” tactics such as handing out fliers at trade
shows where the company doesn’t buy a booth. These tactics are often
favored by startups because they’re far less expensive than paid media
efforts. Many consumer products find their first customers through free
sample or trial programs or by handing out samples or discount coupons on
street corners.
The downside of earned media: unlike paid media, which run on specific
dates and locations, editorial coverage is unpredictable and runs—or doesn’t
—as editorial space or the product’s news value allow.
Online marketing is every bit as important to
marketers in the physical channel as it is to their
web counterparts.
 
Paid media
 is exactly what it sounds like: media exposure that’s
purchased on TV, blimps, direct mail or the web. This kind of activity can
cost literally millions of dollars when rolled out, so customer discovery
employs small-scale tests to see which tactic will deliver the best results later,
at product launch.
Other paid-media awareness-creation tactics that aren’t free include
advertising, trade shows, direct mail, catalogs, events, telemarketing, and in-
store promotion. Most physical-channel marketers also promote their
products online, of course. During customer discovery your spending will be
low until you successfully test a tactic and prove that it generates leads and
sales cost-effectively.
Simple “Get Customer” Tactics to Consider
Build a “get customers”-hypothesis spending spreadsheet that lists:
the free and paid media programs
what the company hopes to achieve and at what cost
Before conducting these or any other tests of customer-relationship
tactics:
     1.  Create a “pass/fail” metric for each “Get” test that defines whether it
worked and should be expanded. An example: will we get one sales
call for every 30 phone calls made to prospects?
     2.  Consider a methodology for improving the results of each test, such as:
If the call blitz doesn’t work, we will e-mail first and then call each
prospect twice.
     3.  Be sure the tests are objectively measurable so that the big spending
decisions that follow aren’t made based on the fact that “it felt good”
or “seems to work well.” JetBlue’s metric for radio ads might seek to
generate reservations-hotline calls at a cost of $1 each. The logic: they
can spend $3 on marketing (sometimes called customer acquisition
cost) to sell a round-trip ticket, and one caller in three buys a ticket on
average.
     4.  Don’t forget that people buy from people. Create, don’t avoid,
opportunities to talk via phone or in person with potential customers.
There are few more powerful sales tools!
Most companies selling through the physical
channel will use a variety of web/mobile marketing
tactics...
 
     5.  Remember that most companies selling through the physical channel
still use a variety of web/mobile marketing tactics to gain awareness
and sales for their products, so be sure to include elements of
web/mobile “Get” programs from the next section.
The sample spreadsheet in 
Figure 3.10
 charts the costs and expected
results of the “get” efforts for a startup’s new heavy-duty, $2,500 printer sold
to businesses through office-products stores. The spreadsheet is used to be
sure the program tests are affordable.
Sample Customer Relationship Program Spreadsheet
Earned Media
Paid media
Program goals
   
50 sales plus 60 inquiries, 10% of the inquiries convert
Total
   
56 sales, 54 prospects
Total cost/sale
   
= $140.00 (8700/56) vs. profit/sale of $300.00
√ This is a good test
Sample Customer Relationship “Tactics to Test” Hypothesis with
Return on Investment Analysis
 (Figure 3.10)
“Keep Customers”
As the “Get” customers exercise clearly illustrates, getting a new customer is
an expensive process. Thus it’s important to think now about how the
company will 
keep,
 or retain, customers it’s worked so hard to get. When
customers cancel a subscription, never return to a supermarket, or close a
corporate purchasing account, it’s called “churn” or “attrition” (the opposite
of retention!).
The “Keep Customers” Funnel
 (Figure 3.11)
Develop Your “Keep Customers” Strategy
“Keep Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.3b)
For any customer retention strategy to work, first the company must
deliver on all its promises that got the customers to buy in the first place.
Customers need to love the product or service, and every customer-facing
aspect of the business model has to perform exceptionally, from customer
service and support to complaint-handling, delivery, billing, and more. First,
a steady stream of product upgrades and enhancements should always keep
the product ahead of competition. By their nature, these are core-value-
creation activities and should be addressed in the value proposition
hypothesis.
Next, begin to think about programs that reach out to customers
proactively to strengthen or bolster retention. This can be as simple as placing
(often quite powerful) outbound calls to be sure customers are happy or as
complex as a multi-tiered loyalty-points program to reward repeat purchases.
In a startup’s early days, it’s hard to test the impact of loyalty programs, since
the results need to be measured over long periods of time.

In a startup’s early days, it’s hard to test the impact
of loyalty programs...
 
In addition, consider loyalty programs such as points, rewards and
discounts as well as long-term retention incentives like multi-year contracts.
Make them part of the hypothesis, and test them where possible during
customer validation.
Finally, consider other parts of the business model canvas. Are there
things your partners can do to help you keep customers? Other resources you
can use?
Simple “Keep Customers” Tactics to Consider
: During customer
discovery, put together plans and then test some basic, inexpensive “Keep”
activities to see how they perform. Use the test results to guide future plans in
customer validation and creation. Some simple programs to test and consider:
Loyalty programs:
 How you will use loyalty programs to retain
customers.
Customer check-in calls:
 Put together a plan to call every customer, or
every fifth customer, once a month or once a quarter simply to thank
them for their business and see how they like the product. While you
have them on the phone, probe for questions they have about the
product, features or functions. (By the way, e-mail is still a poor
substitute for a voice or Skype connection.) Over time, target at least a
15 percent improvement in repeat sales or renewals from customers
who’ve talked.
Launch a customer-satisfaction survey:
 Whether on the web or by mail
or e-mail, plan to check with customers about their use of and
satisfaction with the product or service. (Probe for complaints or lack of
use, and reach out to any who express problems. Look for at least a 15
percent reduction in churn from those who’ve been contacted.)
Send product-update bulletins:
 Create simple tip sheets or user notes on
how customers are making the most of the product. (Send them to all
users, and offer a prize for users whose tips are published later. This is
difficult to measure precisely but inexpensive to implement.)
Monitor customer-service issues:
 Customers who complain frequently
are most likely to churn. (Get proactive with these customers, fix their
problems, and make them happy. Far fewer complainers should leave if
they’ve had their problems addressed.)
Customer lock-in/high switching costs:
 If it’s relatively easy for your
customer to switch from your products to your competitors’, you’ll
probably have a higher churn rate. You may want to consider tactics for
“locking in” customers to your product or solution (through long-term
contracts, unique technology, or data that can’t be easily transferred).
It’s 5-10x cheaper to keep a customer than to
acquire one.
 
Longer-Term Customer Retention
: Customer retention is effective only
when the customers self-identify so they can be contacted by the salesperson,
channel partner, or company representative charged with keeping them happy
and coming back to buy more. As you learn more about individual customers
over time, retention becomes increasingly individualized and targeted based
on the observed and measured customer behavior. This subject is more fully
addressed during customer validation, when there are more customers to
think about keeping.
Specific retention metrics to monitor and act on include:
purchase patterns: volume, frequency, slowdowns or halts
participation in “grow customers” programs (described in the next
section)
number of complaints to customer service, refund requests, problems,
and the like
participation, activity levels, redemptions in loyalty and incentive
programs
Retention programs live or die by a close monitoring of customer
behavior to learn who’s staying and who’s leaving and why. You’ll organize
the metrics around “cohorts,” or common groups of customers (such as “new
customers signed in January”). Three-month customers, for example, may
behave one way while nine-month customers may be more or less active than
their newer brethren.
“Grow Customers”
Once a company has a customer, why not sell them more, since it costs less
than acquiring new customers? Most startups think only about the revenue
they receive in their first sale to a customer, but smart companies think about
the revenue they can get over the lifetime of the relationship they have with a
customer. Measuring customer lifetime value can be important when
computing a startup’s potential. Describe how the company will get more
revenue from its existing customer base with programs that sell more and
encourage customers to refer new ones to the company.
The “Grow Customers” Funnel
 (Figure 3.12)
Develop a “Grow Customers” Strategy
“Grow Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 3.3c)
Your “Grow” strategy will have two key components: get the customers you
have to buy more, and get them to refer other customers to you. A few
“Grow” tactics only work in the physical channel, such as:
“Upsell” offers such as “spend $25 more and get free shipping”
In-pack promotional mailers of offers, coupons, and samples
Specials or premiums only available to customers who meet with a sales
rep
Direct mail is also an effective customer growth tool, of course.
Increasingly, however, physical channel marketers are turning to online
marketing rather than postal mail because of its speed, lower cost, and the
ability to target better. 
You should also study the discussion of 
“Grow”
strategy and tactics in the web/mobile section
 for many more ideas.
 This will
help you shape your initial programs to grow your customer base through
additional sales and referrals.
It’s difficult at this time to think through and test extensive “Grow”
customers programs because you have very few customers to test them with.
Far more detail is provided in the customer validation step, when there are
enough customers aboard your “Grow” programs.
Checklist 9: Customer Relationships
Goal
: How you will “Get, Keep and Grow Customers” in a physical channel
Reference
: Chapter 3, Customer Relationships
  
Draw Your “Get/Keep/Grow” Funnel
  
Describe your “Get Customers” Strategy
     
  Awareness
     
  Interest
     
  Consideration
     
  Purchase
  
What are your “Get Customers” Tactics?
     
  Earned Media?
     
  Paid Media?
  
Describe your “Keep Customers” Strategy
     
  Interact
     
  Retain
  
What are your “Keep Customers” Tactics?
     
  Loyalty programs?
     
  Product updates?
     
  Customer Surveys?
  
Describe your “Grow Customers” Strategy
     
  New Revenue from existing customers
     
  Customer referrals
  
What are your “Grow Customers” Tactics?\
Up-sell/Cross-sell/other
tactics
     
  Referral generation programs to test
Exit criteria:
     
  A preliminary first hypothesis of all Get/Keep Grow activities
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Note to reader: Although tailored to web/mobile startups, the following pages
include tips and guidelines that physical startups will find useful.
Customer Relationships Hypothesis
 This customer relationships brief describes how you get customers to
your website or mobile app, keep them as customers and grow additional
revenue from them over time.
The “Get, Keep and Grow” Customers Funnel in Web/Mobile
(Figure 3.13)
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 This is not the time to broadly launch
your site or app to a wide audience. You are writing the briefs here, not
implementing tactics with your MVP!
 
Review the previous section on customer relationships for physical
products before starting this one. The web/mobile customer funnel in 
Figure
3.13
 is quite different from its physical counterpart in 
Figure 3.7
. Getting
customers here is simpler, having only two steps. It also includes a “viral
loop” where early customers invite friends and colleagues to explore the new
product. Finally, not visible in the diagram is the fact that web/mobile
startups can test tactics faster, market less expensively, and reach out to far
more customers than companies in the physical channel.
The test of “Get, Keep and Grow” activities during customer discovery
is small-scale, exposing the “rough and dirty,” or low-fidelity, minimum
viable product to a modest number of customers, perhaps a few hundred or
so, to gauge their reaction to the business model (including value proposition,
price, and product features.) Discovery explores which tactics work and
gauges initial reactions to the MVP.
Customer Relationship for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4)
The right-hand column of 
Table 3.4
 provides an overview of
web/mobile “Get, Keep and Grow” strategies and tactics. It focuses first on
getting customers, since the company first has to 
have
 customers before it can
work to keep them, sell them a second time, or grow them.
Many web/mobile products operate as multi-sided markets; Google and
Facebook are canonical examples. Consumers use the product at no cost.
Advertisers pay the company to reach those customers with ads, AdWords,
textlinks and other marketing messages. That revenue is why Google can
afford to build massive data centers and offer search for “Free.”
Multi-sided marketers need two separate, parallel “Get” approaches—
one for the users and another for the payers, since the value proposition for
each is quite different. Almost universally, multi-sided marketers focus first
on efforts to get users. A company that has aggregated an audience of many
millions can almost certainly find marketers eager to pay for the privilege of
communicating with that audience.
Getting Customers: Acquisition and Activation
Develop the company’s hypothesis about how it will “Get” customers.
There are a million-plus apps for sale on mobile app stores and an
infinite number of commerce, social and content websites, so the mere fact
that you’ve launched a new one doesn’t make it a successful business.
Building your product is the easy part. The hard part is getting customers
 to
find your app, site or product. It’s a daunting, never-ending challenge to build
customer relationships, quite literally, one customer at a time.
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 3.14)
Building your product is easy. The hard part is
Getting Customers.
 
Acquisition vs. Activation: What’s the Difference?
Let’s get started with the first two steps for “getting” customers: acquisition
and activation.
“Get Customers” Tools for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4a)
Customer 
Acquisition
: The acquisition phase equates to the “awareness,”
“interest,” and “consideration” steps in the physical channel, where
customers learn about and explore a product before they buy. In web/mobile
apps, the “Get” effort focuses on bringing as many customers as possible to
the company’s online “front door”—the landing page. There, they’re
introduced to the product and hopefully buy it or use it. Since the number of
people who come to a landing page and look but don’t buy or use is often
very high, web/mobile “Get” plans must reach lots of people—for a
consumer website, that can be millions.
Customer 
Activation
: This second step in the “Get” process is much like the
“purchase” step in the physical channel. Here the customer shows interest
through a free download or trial, a request for more information, or a
purchase. 
A customer should be considered activated even if he doesn’t
purchase or register, as long as the company has enough information to re-
contact him
 (whether by e-mail, phone, text, etc.) with explicit permission to
do so.
Overview: How Customers Shop Online
Unlike the door-to-door salesmen of yesteryear, your job on the web is to
“pull” customers to you rather than to push your product at them. The web
offers a near-limitless tool set to help you pull customers in.
Your job on the web is to “pull” customers to you...
 
Your first step in customer acquisition and activation is understanding how
people buy or engage with your product. Here’s how it happens:
Step one
: People discover a need or want to solve a problem.
 They say, “I
want to throw a party,” or feel lonely and decide to find a hot party or a
dating site. Then what?
Step two
: They begin a search.
 Overwhelmingly, in this century, that search
begins online. It often happens at 
Google.com
, but it can happen on
Facebook, where they ask their friends, or on Quora, where they solicit
opinions, or on hundreds of other special-interest “recommendation” sites
from Yelp to Zagat to 
TripAdvisor.com
.
Step three
: They don’t look very hard.
 People don’t just “find” you online,
and in fact they often only pay attention to the first few things they uncover
(how often do you search beyond the first page of results on Google?). You
must 
make your site, app or product as visible as humanly possible, in as
many of these places as possible where your customers are likely to begin the
search. (The entire “Get” section ahead will guide you in doing just this.)
Step four
: They go where they’re invited, entertained or informed.
 You don’t
“earn” interest from your customers with hard-boiled sales pitches or bland
information. In a typical Google search, you’re one of many thousands of
options the customer can click on. So you have to earn that click by providing
inviting, helpful or entertaining information in lots of formats (copy,
diagrams, white papers, blogs, videos, games, demos, you name it) and by
participating in the communities and social media your customers are likely
to be.
Develop your “Get Customers” Strategy
Make your information as rich and inviting—and widely available—as
possible and cast the widest-possible net when people begin their search.
Provide helpful, non-sales-y information that leads them back to your
product, app, or site. Then the selling process begins.
Use the way people make decisions to guide your acquisition and activation
strategy:
1
. 
Determine who your audience
 is, then your goal is to be prominent
wherever they spend time on the web. Skateboarders don’t read 
The
Wall Street Journal
 or TechCrunch very much, so focus on
skateboarding sites, blogs and the like.
2
. 
What kind of content
 will they find attractive? Our skateboarders
probably prefer illustrations, games, and videos over long essays and
white papers. Reach them with the kinds of content they’ll find most
interesting and helpful, such as tips on safer skateboarding or bolder
tricks, not long essays on the finer points of boarding.
3
. 
Make sure your content works
 in the location. Quora, Twitter, and
Facebook users expect short, interesting items and get bogged down
with or ignore long ones. Social networks don’t have much use for
lengthy sales pitches. Be sure your content “fits” where you put it.
4
. 
Participate in the communities
 your customers are a part of. Answer
questions, provide feedback, offer tips, and gently invite people to
explore your product.
5
. 
Create content that people want to link to
. Whether it’s helpful tips,
FAQs, cartoons or fun videos, make your content the kind of content
your customers want to share with friends. The result extends your
invitation to those friends more often than not.
Customer Acquisition Tactics to Test
The best way to get this started is to put your initial acquisition test plan into
a spreadsheet outlining the activities, their costs, and each program’s goals.
See a sample acquisition-plan spreadsheet in the 
“Activate Plan”
 section of
Chapter 8. Acquisition begins by using free or earned web-media
opportunities to acquire customers, since “free” is obviously the best cost.
The web offers many free crowd-sourcing or acquisition opportunities (SEO,
social media, viral marketing, buzz and more).
Earned or free acquisition tactics:
Public relations:
 Generate small “test” amounts of news and feature
coverage about the problem (not the product itself) on websites, blogs
and social nets. Don’t publicize the product or solution until customer
validation, it’s just too early. (Public relations doesn’t mean hire an
expensive outside agency. During customer discovery, you should be
learning this firsthand.)
Viral marketing:
 This often-confused term refers to three types of
acquisition marketing, each used in different web/mobile channels. The
three are perhaps the most important customer acquisition tactics for
web/mobile marketers, because they’re all free or inexpensive to
implement. This is discussed in 
“grow” customers
 where viral activity
encourages customers to refer others
Search engine optimization
 (SEO), an unpaid, or “natural,” search
option, directs consumers to the product or service
Social networking
 encourages friends and early customers to blog about
a product or a company, use Facebook to “like” it, or use Twitter and
other tools to broadcast personal recommendations
After you get the free acquisition programs going, you should start to
test paid tactics.
Paid acquisition tactics:
It’s hard to determine how much money to spend on acquisition tactics, in
part because there are so many variables: how much funding you have, how
confident you are in your hypotheses, and how hard it is to find your
customers are three of the key considerations. Obviously, free tactics are
better than paid tactics when they deliver quality customers with strong LTV
in sufficient numbers to create a great business. As a rule, however, life is
seldom that easy, and you’ll need to test a blend of paid tactics along with a
wider variety of free ones.
Here are some of the most common web/mobile paid acquisition tactics you
should consider:
Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising: targetable, accountable paid search
advertising on Google and other search engines drives targeted traffic to
the company
Online or traditional media advertising: often used to introduce a new
product or service
Affiliate marketing: other related websites are paid to drive traffic to the
product site or app.
Online lead generation: purchase of permission-based e-mail lists to
solicit interest (much trickier and more highly regulated for direct-to-
mobile-phone messaging)
Review the list of “get” customers tactics from the physical channel to
see which ones warrant testing for your web/mobile startup. Candidates
certainly include advertising, direct mail, and everything from zany on-street
promotions to blimps, billboards and more.
Some quick and simple acquisition tests:
In Phase 2 of customer discovery you’ll run some small-scale acquisition
tests with the free and paid tactics described above to test your understanding
of the customer 
problem/need
. In Phase 3 of customer discovery, you’ll again
use acquisition tools to gauge initial customer reaction to the MVP and
discover whether the MVP is a compelling solution to the problem. These are
limited and targeted tests, not a product launch. Press releases make no sense
here, for example, since wide dissemination could either bring too many
customers or create the false impression that the product is “launched” and
finished.
Your Phase 2 & 3 acquisition tests should be limited to controllable,
inexpensive, easily measured tactics like these:
     •   
Buy $500 worth of AdWords
 and see if they’ll drive customers
representing five or 10 times that amount in potential revenue to the
site or app and at least get them to register. Test at least two different
headlines and as many calls to action, carefully monitoring the
performance of each. Drop ineffective ones and refine the best
Viral marketing can’t start until there is a customer
base to viralize.
 
     •   
Use Facebook messages or Tweet
 to measurable audiences to invite at
least 1,000 people to explore the new product. Test several different
messages or invitations to be sure the messaging about the product 
is
clear. If none of the messages delivers engagement or registrations,
the product or offer may well be the problem
     •   
Viral marketing:
 Getting customers can’t start until there’s a customer
base to viralize. There are several types of viral marketing, so review
the viral discussion in the previous section (and also 
here
). Network-
effect businesses should consider viral activities sooner
     •   
Post referral banners
 using Commission Junction to get sites offering
your offer. Spend $1,000 in referral fees to relevant websites (usually
$12 per referral). If the banners run and the money’s largely unspent,
move on
     •   
Buy an e-mail blast list
 of targeted customers for $500 or $1,000. Send
at least two versions of the offer and expect to generate at least three
times the potential revenue to at least sign up, if not a purchase
     •   
Traffic partners
 are another important source of users or customers that
fuel the “Get” effort. These are typically contractual relationships
with other companies that provide predictable streams of customers or
users to your company while you provide either customers or fees to
the partner. This is so important to most web/mobile businesses that
it’s addressed in its own “traffic partners” hypothesis
Who’s Creating This Content?
Successful web/mobile startup teams have a combination of skills: great
technology skills (hacking/hardware/science), great hustling skills (to search
for the business model, customers and market), and great user-facing design.
The co-founder who’s the user-interface/design expertise owns content
creation. Ideally he or she is talented enough to create it without legions of
hourly-rate agency folk around. Use 
guru.com
 and 
craigslist.com
 to find
talent, cost-effective freelancers with good references.
Customer Activation Tactics to Test:
Activation is the second step in getting customers. As discussed earlier, this
is where the customer either makes a purchase or, at a minimum, raises a
hand and says, “I’m interested, contact me.” Activation could be an
exploratory visit your website or free mobile app to see how a game is
played, a comment posted on a blog or social network, or the use of a free
search engine. At the other end of the spectrum, low-cost mobile apps and
other products find transactions to be the best initial activation, since the
product may be a free version or cost only 99 cents.
Activation is the choke point... where customers
decide whether they want to participate, play or
purchase.
 
For web/mobile businesses, 
activation is the choke point
—the make-or-
break place where customers decide whether they want to participate, play, or
purchase. Here, unlike the physical channel, the “product is the salesman,”
encouraging visitors to explore, try, or read about the product on their own,
without pressure or patter from a sales representative. Activation is always
encouraged by a compelling value proposition, well-communicated and
coupled with a good, clear offer and a low-fidelity (in discovery) or hi-
fidelity (in validation) MVP. Start by creating an activation-tactics plan in
simple spreadsheet form as in this 
example
.
Many startups falsely assume that because their customers are online,
online communication is all their customers want or expect. Very often, even
a single phone call can make a dramatic difference in acquisition and
activation rates. In some instances, as few as half the customers who discover
a product online will activate or buy without human-to-human contact. And
the presence of a phone number is known to communicate the company’s
authenticity. Just the presence of the company’s phone number—even if
never called—can increase its online click-through rate by five percent 
to 30
percent. (When adding a phone number, be sure it’s answered promptly,
knowledgeably, and effectively by someone with incentives to activate the
caller.)
Acquisition and Activation in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 3.15)
Some quick activation tests:
     •   
Capture the customer’s e-mail address
 and get permission to follow up
with further information. Follow up with 1,000 customers and expect
at least 50 or more to agree to activate
     •   
Offer incentives for activation:
 Offer a free trial, download, or white
paper or a significant discount to 500 or 1,000 customers. Try this
with at least three different offers, hoping to find at least one that
generates a 5 percent or greater response rate. Keep testing until you
do, and then calculate the revenue model based on response rates, and
costs
     •   
Call 100 prospects who don’t activate immediately.
 See if the phone
calls generate enough of a response-rate improvement to warrant the
cost. Three times the response rate is probably needed
     •   
Free-to-paid conversion:
 Offer a seven- or 14-day free trial of an app,
service, or web/mobile product. Then compare the total 60-day
acquisition revenue with the Get results of the typical paid offer. Or
offer the use of some but not all of the site or app’s features.
eHarmony.com
, for example, lets people find their ideal matches for
free but requires paid enrollment to tell your dream date that you’ve
discovered him or her
Even a single phone call can make a dramatic
difference in acquisition and activation rates.
 
     •   
Use free-download websites
 to offer free downloads or trials. Make
sure the revenue generated over a 90-day period exceeds that of the
standard activation offer
Monitor the results of all tests and, when you’re not satisfied (or it fails
your pass/fail test) revise the program and test again.
Keeping Customers (Customer Retention)
The “Keep Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 3.16)
Keeping customers in the web/mobile channels has the same goal as
retention efforts in the physical world: to minimize customer churn/attrition
by providing great products and services, and interacting with customers
often. (At this point in customer discovery, there aren’t customers to retain,
so identify retention programs to test in the future.) Retention is done more
easily online, where companies have the incredible power and ability to track
and monitor every single prospect’s or customer’s individual behavior or lack
of behavior (without violating their privacy).
“Keep Customers” Tools in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4b)
Loyalty and points programs and other tactics borrowed from the
physical channel can also play a significant role here, as can elegant
personalized customer service and support, conducted digitally as much as
possible. Strong digital help tools, FAQs, user blogs, clubs, and newsletters
help with retention as well.
Customer Retention Strategy
Retention programs live or die by a close monitoring of customer behavior to
learn who’s staying and who’s leaving and why. It’s critical to instrument the
product not in order to track everything but in order to follow the most
important customer behaviors you want to improve.
For example:
Track start dates and sources of each customer (referred by a blogger,
another site, etc.)
Track customers’ activity level individually. How often do they come?
How long is each visit? What’s the time span between visits?
When do customers abandon, and what were they doing that caused
them to do so?
Monitor customers’ behavior on-site: what do they click on, what don’t
they click on?
Track customer referrals to others and the sources and activity level of
referred visitors
Track the results of each promotion, whether outbound or on the site
itself
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an
overview/tutorial. There’s no way you can implement all this or even
process this in one sitting.
 
Keep the following guidelines in mind as you test:
E-mail is easy to ignore and at times feels like spam, so be careful about
overly relying on it. At least four of five e-mails are never opened, and
consumers often unsubscribe from self-serving marketing e-mails
Consumers often resent “faux” personalization. People appreciate
legitimate, helpful personalization if they’ve opted in for example
(“Here are the sneakers we have in your size, 11D” is far better than
“Great buys for Bob”)
Don’t get lazy and make automated marketing and e-mail programs your
only customer-retention efforts. Focus on great product, product
enchancements, terrific service and other core retention initiatives
Embrace social networks as points of retention. Use them to keep
visibility high and to invite customers and friends back often
The key for retention for web/mobile channels is that the data customers
have given you make personalized retention efforts easy. But you need to
collect it. Observe each customer’s behavior and interact with customers
based on what they do or don’t do.
Track the behavior of each customer individually. Use that data to create
a personal one-to-one relationship that guides him to the next steps the
company wants him to take. (But always respect personal-data privacy.)
Retention programs live or die by a close
monitoring of customer behavior.
 
Simple Retention Tests to Consider:
The hypothesis should include some core initial retention efforts that will be
discussed during discovery and tested on a modest scale later, during
customer validation. Be sure to include digital versions of relevant programs
outlined in the 
physical section
. Some specific tactics to test:
     •   
Outreach programs,
 including welcome e-mails, how-to guides, and
phone calls thanking the user for coming aboard and offering simple
tips on how to get more out of the product. Consider retention e-mails
like these:
          
   We haven’t seen you visit in two weeks. Is everything OK?
          
   I’ve noticed you’ve had a few problems. How can we help?
          
   Have you seen some of the new features on our site?
          
   Here are five “power user” ideas for getting more out of your time
at XYZ.com
     •   
Blogs, RSS
 and news feeds to further engage customers or users with
the product or site
     •   
Loyalty programs
 that encourage and reward repeat visits, purchases, or
referrals borrowed from the physical channel
     •   
Contests and special events:
 webinars, special guests, new features, and
other reasons for current customers to come back
     •   
Mobile app push notifications:
 iOS/Android gives developers the
ability to push messages to users even when the app is closed. For app
developers, getting this right is critical to retention and customer
engagement
     •   
Product updates and enhancements
 to the actual product itself always
drive loyalty and retention (and communicating them to customers
helps)
Getting new customers is painful and costly, so
keeping those already on the roster is easier and
more cost-effective.
 
     •   
Placing live phone calls to users
 several weeks or (if annual) a month
or more before contract renewal is a good option if you have a
subscription revenue model. Make them friendly, service-oriented
calls, but always listen for signs of potential churn and be ready with
a deal, discount or offer to save the customer. Remember: getting new
customers is painful and costly, so keeping those already on the roster
is easier and more cost-effective
     •   
Tips-and-tricks newsletters
, time-triggered e-mails every seven or 14
days based on users’ on-site behavior or lack of visits
     •   
Personalized customer service and support
, conducted digitally as
much as possible. Strong digital help tools, FAQs, user blogs, clubs,
and newsletters help with retention as well
     •   
Customer lock-in/high switching costs:
 If it’s relatively easy for your
customer to switch from your products to your competitors’ (in an
existing market) you’ll probably have a higher churn rate. You may
want to consider tactics to “lock in” your customer to your product or
solution (through unique technology, data that can’t be transferred—
think Facebook and LinkedIn—or high startup costs with a new
vendor.)
Monitor Specific Retention Metrics
Monitor and act on at least these basic retention metrics:
signs of dwindling visits, page views or time spent on the site or app
increased time between visits
average customer life (how long they stay active) and, if possible later,
lifetime value
increases in complaints, help or support tickets
reduced response rates or open rates on company e-mails
Organize the metrics around “cohorts,” or common groups of customers
(like “those who joined in January”), since, for example, three-month
customers may behave one way while nine-month customers may be much
more or less active than their newer brethren.
Growing Customers (New Revenue and Referrals)
The “Grow Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
(Figure 3.17)
There are two ways to grow existing customers: get current customers to
spend more money or encourage them to send more customers to the
company.
 
PROCEED WITH CAUTION:
 Remember, this is an
overview/tutorial. There’s no way you can implement all this or even
process this in one sitting.
 
“Grow Customers” Tools for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 3.4c)
1. Get Current Customers to Spend More
Getting current customers to buy more starts by making sure they’re satisfied
with the product, performance and price. Then you try to sell them more
product, upgrade their service, or extend their contracts. These activities are
important for the long-term, so test at least a few during customer validation.
Some of the basic approaches to Grow Customers include:
Cross-sell programs
 that encourage buyers of a product to buy adjacent
products. Getting buyers of toner cartridges, for example—to buy paper,
pencils, and other office products
Up-selling programs
 that promote the purchase of “more” of higher-end
products. For example, buying cases of toner rather than single
cartridges, or the purchase of copiers, fax machines and other office
machines along with the toner
Next-selling programs
 that concentrate on the next order: can the
company encourage a long-term toner contract, sell the customer
envelopes to put the copies in, or become his primary office-products
supplier? These basic customer growth strategies work in consumer
goods as well as business-to-business
Unbundling
, which sometimes grows revenue. If a product is complex
or multi-featured, split it into several products, each sold separately.
This works well in many tech, software, and industrial product areas
For now, develop a hypothesis about how the company will grow its
customers, and test those ideas with—who else?—customers.
Some simple “grow” programs to consider:
Every “thank you” or confirmation page should suggest multiple items
the customer may also find interesting, and ideally provide an incentive
for doing so
New items, special offers, and discounts for increasing the order size
should be prominent and integrated with the checkout process for high
visibility
e-commerece companies should have “recommendation engines.” “If
you bought X, you’ll love Y”
e-commerce companies should include special offers and discounts in
each shipment
e-mail customers to introduce new and different products or “add-on”
features to buy
Promote special sales and offers on new products or services the
customer hasn’t bought
Customer referral
s are the most common type of viral marketing,
although they obviously can’t begin until you actually have customers
(so it’s discussed in the “Grow” section). Viral marketing stimulates
referrals of customers from other happy customers. Generate attention
among the largest audience possible. Consider tools like YouTube and
conferences you can attend and perhaps speak or promote at. Encourage
friends of the company and its team to invite their friends to learn more.
Consider contests, sweepstakes and promotions to drive the reach of
viral efforts
Viral products
 help sell themselves. Hotmail, Gmail, Facebook and
many other web products end every customer communication by saying,
“Invite a friend to use our service.” When used, it’s powerful and
virtually free viral marketing
Network-effect virality
 boosts usage of products like Skype,
Photobucket, and even fax machines. You can’t talk via Skype with a
friend who doesn’t have it or fax someone without a fax machine, so
customers encourage others to join, expanding the network for their own
benefit. In the process, they get new users for the company
Customer referrals are the most “honest” source of
new business...
 
2. Get Customers to Send More Customers to the
Company
There are lots of different viral marketing tools and tactics that help you get
customers to refer other customers to the company. Here are the six most
powerful viral marketing techniques to consider:
Encourage customers to “like” the product on Facebook
Offer customers discounts or free trial offers to share with friends
Enable customers to e-mail their friends using their address books to
create mailing lists
Create contests or incentives to encourage Tweeting, “liking” and other
viral activities
Highlight social-networking action buttons on the site to make viral
efforts easy
Encourage bloggers to write about the product, and reward them for
doing so
(The customer relationship hypotheses should also address how the
“Get, Keep and Grow” programs will be optimized once they’re under way.)
Key Resources Hypothesis
This brief identifies external resources critical to the company’s success and
how you’ll find and secure them.
Key resources fall into four main categories: 
physical
, 
financial
, 
human
and 
intellectual property
. In each relevant category, create a list of the key
resources you’ll require, what you expect to pay, and where you’ll go to find
them.
Physical resources:
 These fall into two types: company facilities and
product/service resources. Examples of company facilities are office space
and company location (near mass transit to more easily attract lots of
employees, in a city with great restaurants, etc.). Product/services may
include a steady supply of superthin silicon wafers or iron ore or thousands of
feet of warehouse space or specialized lab or manufacturing space. Many
resources are capital-intensive, particularly where physical goods are
concerned—manufacturing equipment, raw materials, and the like.
...many of the capital-intensive resources have
become utilities or can be outsourced.
 
In the 21
st
 century, many of the capital-intensive equipment or services
resources companies used to need to physically own and pay for have
become utilities or can be outsourced. For example, startups that need
computing and server capacity can buy processing power and storage, in the
cloud, from 
Amazon.com
 and many others (slashing the cost of a software
startup by a factor of 10 or more). Manufacturing that used to be a capital-
intensive is now outsourced to Asia (with an equally significant reduction in
cost). IT and services can be done cheaper in India, etc.
Financial resources:
 Money is the lifeblood of startups. You stay in business
until you run out of it. This book is about how to reduce startup infant
mortality by making everything you do less wasteful and more cash-efficient.
There are tons of articles, websites and entire books on how to raise
money for a startup—and whom to raise it from. Friends and family, crowd
funding, angels, venture capital and corporate partners are the usual suspects.
But don’t overlook government grants as an alternative funding source for
new ventures. In the U.S., the 
grants.gov
 website is the first stop for a number
of sources such as SBA (Small Business Administration) and SBIR (Small
Business Innovation Research) grants.
Companies selling physical products have additional sources of capital:
Equipment lease line.
 This lets you finance the entire purchase price of
business equipment or commercial vehicles. Typically offered by a
bank, a lease line can be a great solution whether you need to preserve
working capital for other expenses or you’re in an expansion phase and
need financing
Factoring.
 If you’ve sold product to a customer who takes a while to
pay, you can sell your accounts receivable (i.e., the invoices) to a third
party (called 
a factor)
 at a discount. It provides your company with
immediate cash
Vendor financing.
 This is a loan arrangement that takes place between
your company and a vendor that supplies large volumes of their product
to you. The vendor lends money to you so you can buy products from it
Don’t forget the 
Human
 Resources
Human resources fall into three categories: personal advice (mentors,
teachers, and coaches), company advisors, and qualified employees.
Teachers, coaches, and mentors
 are people you’ll need to help you
advance your 
personal
 career. If you want to learn about a specific subject,
find a teacher. If you want to hone specific skills or reach an exact goal, hire
a coach. If you want to get smarter and better over the course of your career,
find someone who cares about you enough to be a mentor.
Advisors are
 people you’ll need to help advance your 
company’s
success. Founders fail when they believe their visions are facts. Listening to
advice based on 
experience can help you sort through whether your vision is
a hallucination. Getting an advisory board (by expanding your circle of
accumulated wisdom beyond your investors) is so important that it’s an
explicit step in the Customer Development process.
Qualified and motivated employees
 are the difference between a good
idea that never goes anywhere and a billion-dollar firm. Will your company
need dozens of specialized engineers or coders or designers as it grows? If so,
where and how will you find them? Is your city or location a magnet for
world-class talent? Is there a shortage of talent? Will offshore teams be
required as the company scales, and how will you select and manage them?
In more specialized industries (think avionics, chip design, and biotech) this
may be even more challenging if scaling the team quickly is important,
especially if the company is headquartered in a smaller or off-the-beaten-path
location to where you’ll have to relocate much of your talent pool in order to
employ them. If you’re in a part of the country or the world where the
number of potential employees is limited, how can you be more creative to
get them? Identify what the human resource needs are now and what they
will be two to three years later to be sure that growth won’t be constrained.
Intellectual Property is a Key Resource
Intellectual property
 gives you rights to stop others from using your
creativity. The assets you can protect may include your “core technology,”
such as source code, hardware designs, architecture, processes, and formulas.
Or it can be your brand, logo or domain name. You can protect business
processes, know-how, customer information, and product roadmaps.
Protection is also available for content such as music, books, and film. Some
of these assets are protected automatically. For other classes, it’s wise and
sometimes mandatory to go through a registration, application or examination
process to get full protection.
Trademark:
 A trademark protects branding and marks and gives you the
right to prevent others from using “confusingly similar” marks and logos.
Trademark protection lasts as long as you use the mark. The more you use the
mark, the stronger your protection. Trademark registration is optional but has
significant advantages if approved.
Copyright:
 A copyright protects creative works of authorship, typically
songs, books, movies, photos, etc. Copyright gives you the right to prohibit
others from copying, distributing or making derivatives of your work. It
protects “expressions” of ideas but doesn’t protect the underlying ideas. (If
your product is software, copyright is also used to prohibit someone from
stealing your software and reselling it as machine and/or source code.)
Copyright protection lasts practically forever. Registration is optional but is
required for suing for infringement.
TYPES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION
Types of Intellectual Property Protection
 (Table 3.5)
Contract:
 A contract is a binding legal agreement that’s enforceable in a
court of law. There’s no official registration process; you have whatever
protection is defined in the contract (e.g., a nondisclosure agreement gives
you certain rights to protection of your confidential information). The
protection lasts for the time period defined in the contract.
Patents:
 A patent is a monopoly the government grants to prohibit
others from making, using or selling your invention, even when the other
party’s infringement is innocent or accidental.
Just about anything can be patented—circuits, hardware, software,
applied algorithms, formulas, designs, user interfaces, applications, systems.
Scientific principles or pure mathematical algorithms may not be patented.
Your invention must be “nonobvious.” The test for whether it’s nonobvious
is: given the prior art at the time of the invention, would a typical engineer 1)
identify the problem and 2) solve it with the invention? You must be “first to
file.” You must file in the U.S. within a year of sale, offer for sale, public
disclosure or public use. Your patent application has to include a written
description with details of the claims of the invention. The details have to
allow others to duplicate your invention from your description and have to
use the “best mode” in describing critical techniques/technologies. And it has
to identify all prior “art,” or solutions to the problem.
Patent protection typically lasts 15 to 20 years. There is a formal
application and examination process. Each patent filing will cost your
company $20,000 to $50,000 and take one to four years to complete. Filing
of patents is frequently of major interest to people funding your company.
(There’s something called a “provisional patent” that’s an alternative to a full
patent. It allows you to claim “first to file” and use the term 
patent pending.
Provisional patents get into the patent office quickly and cheaply. However,
they automatically expire after one year, and no patent rights are granted.
Provisional patents are a good placeholder because they’re cheap to file and
don’t get in the way of your other patent efforts.)
Intellectual Property Creates Value
Intellectual property is an asset for your company. You need to acquire,
protect and exploit it. You can map out an intellectual property strategy by
asking:
Who are the key players and technologies in its market(s)?
What are the most important ideas and inventions that need patents (or
provisional patents)? Start filing these early!
What are the important patent applications that come next?
Four Common Intellectual Property Mistakes
Startups Make
1.   
Founders didn’t make a clean break with previous employer:
 Do your
employers or university own or have a claim on your inventions? It’s a
very subjective standard, and since startups don’t often have resources or
time to spend on lawsuits, large companies and universities may use
threats of litigation to ensure that you don’t take anything. Therefore the
best advice is to “take only memories.”
2.   
Your startup cannot show that it owns its intellectual property:
 Take the
time to create a clear, well-documented chain of title (think lab
notebooks) to your intellectual property. If you’re using independent
contractors, make sure you have written agreements assigning work
created. Make sure you have Employee Invention Assignment
Agreements. (If you hire subcontractors or friends to do some work, get
assignment agreements as well.)
3.   
You lost your patent rights due to filing delays/invention disclosures:
 In
the U.S., patent rights are forfeited if you wait more than a year after:
     •   disclosure in a printed publication (white paper, journal/conference
article, website)
     •   offer for sale in the U.S. (start of sales effort, price list, price quotation,
trade-show demonstration, any demonstration not under NDA, public
use in the U.S.)
     In most foreign countries, there is no one-year grace period.
4.   
Your company grants “challenging” licenses to intellectual property:
Startups acquiring their first customers may give special licensing terms
in key markets, territories, etc.—e.g., a grant of “most favored nations”
license terms or other licensee-favorable economic terms. This can make
your intellectual property less valuable to future buyers of your company.
Or you may cut a deal that you can’t assign or transfer (or can’t get out
of) if you get acquired.
There May be Other Key Resources
Consider other external business elements that are vital to the company’s
success. Celebrity websites need a steady stream of “hot” gossip (this one
shouldn’t 
be a problem) and 
MarthaStewart.com
 wouldn’t be much without
Martha. 
Overstock.com
 would fail without a stream of good-quality discount
merchandise.
Dependency Analysis
The company’s dependency analysis basically answers the question “To sell
our product in volume, what has to happen that’s out of our control?” Things
out of a company’s control can include other technology infrastructure that
needs to emerge (all cell phones become web-enabled, fiber optics are in
every home, electric cars are selling in volume). Dependencies also include
changes in consumers’ lifestyles or buying behavior, new laws, changes in
economic conditions, and so on. Specify what needs to happen (let’s say the
widespread adoption of telepathy), when it needs to happen (must be
common among teens by 2020), and what happens if it doesn’t happen (the
product needs to use the Internet instead). Note the benchmarks you’ll use to
measure whether the change is happening when needed.
Identify all key resources in this hypothesis, and explain how the
company will make sure those key resources are readily available. Be sure to
identify the risks of their unavailability, as well as alternatives that will
minimize impact on the company’s business model. Be careful not to confuse
partners (to be discussed next) with resources.
Checklist 10: Key Resources Hypothesis
Goal:
 Identify external resources critical to the company’s success, and how
the company will find and secure them
Reference
: Chapter 3, Key Resources
Describe the all key resources costs, and how they will be acquired
     
  Physical resources
     
  Financial resources
     
  Human resources
     
  Intellectual property
     
  Other key resources
     
  Dependency analysis
Exit criteria:
     
  Physical, financial, human, intellectual property resources required
     
  What they will cost
     
  Where they’ll be found
     
  How they will be secured
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Partners Hypothesis
Key partners often provide capabilities, products, or services that the startup
either can’t or would prefer not to develop itself. Batteries for a flashlight
maker or design services for a website are two simple examples. But the most
famous is Apple and the iPod. Without the record labels providing music as
content, the iPod and iTunes would simply be another hardware/software
player. The partners made the business model the juggernaut it is today.
The key-partners hypothesis names the essential partners your company
will require, along with the “value exchange” with each one (as in “we give
them money, they send us customers”). Partnerships generally fall into four
key areas: 
strategic alliances
; “
coopetition
,” or cooperation between
competitors; 
joint new business development efforts
; and 
key supplier
relationships
.
Think of this hypothesis as a simple three-column spreadsheet. The
headings: partner name (list primary and runner-up candidates), “what they
provide,” and “what we provide.” Don’t feel bad when the word 
money
appears repeatedly in the third column. It’s fairly typical for startups, at least
in their early days.
Strategic alliances,
 generally between noncompetitive companies, can
often shorten the list of things your startup needs to build or provide to offer a
complete product or service. For physical products, alliance partners might
provide product training, installation or service, peripherals or accessories,
whether they’re sold under your startup’s brand name or not. Specialized
service firms in many industries (law, accounting, engineering, IT) can often
market a wider range of services by combining their services with those of
other specialists. Alliances can also be used to broaden a startup’s footprint,
making its product more available in geographies where the startup itself
can’t support sales or service.
Joint new business development efforts
 generally happen later in a
startup’s life, but can be important once the startup has established its own
identity and brand. Dell and HP sell lots of software and products made by
others, but seldom do so until 
they’re confident the product has significant
consumer demand. Think of these as longer-term opportunities to investigate
as part of your customer discovery process.
“Coopetition”
 similarly happens later in a startup’s life, as a rule. It’s a
form of working with a direct competitor to share costs or market together.
New York City’s “fashion week” is a good example of coopetition for
established fashion houses. While they’re fiercely competitive, they work
together to coordinate fashion show schedules so the top buyers can attend all
the key showings. Word for Mac is perhaps the greatest coopetition example
of all time, but both companies were well-established before the product was
developed and launched.
Key supplier relationships
 can mean life or death for a startup. Imagine
how tough it would be to churn out millions of iPhones without Foxconn, the
massive Apple manufacturing partner in China, or to make Ben & Jerry’s
famed Cherry Garcia without an uninterrupted supply of delicious cherries.
Suppliers can be instrumental to any company’s success, but tight, flexible
partnerships can be absolutely critical. Many startups outsource a variety of
“back office” functions, ranging from warehousing and fulfillment of
physical goods to HR, payroll, benefits and accounting. These outsource
suppliers act as extensions of the company that leverage the suppliers’
expertise to improve the startup’s efficiency and cost structure.
Will the partner flex its delivery times, order-size requirements, credit
terms or even its price in your startup’s early days? How will the partner
ensure a steady supply that rises (quickly, we hope) or falls in line with
customer demand? Identify the key suppliers in this hypothesis, along with
what you’ll need from them. You’ll visit with them later to validate this
hypothesis and understand your role and theirs in forging a mutually
beneficial relationship.
Checklist 11: Partners Hypothesis
Goal:
 Identify essential partners and the company’s “value exchange” with
each
Reference
: Chapter 3, Partners
Understand Potential Partner Types
     
  Strategic Alliances
     
  Joint new business efforts
     
  Coopetition
     
  Key suppliers
List your target partners
     
  Necessary partners
     
  What they will provide
     
  How the Company will reciprocate
Exit criteria
:
     
  Understand potential partner types
     
  List target partners, their contributions and what the company will offer
in return
     
  Update your business model canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Revenue and Pricing Hypothesis
The revenue and pricing brief may well be the toughest of all, but it’s
critically important, since it ensures that the business model makes financial
sense. In a way, this brief is elegantly simple, since it asks only four
questions:
1
. 
How many of these things will we sell?
2
. 
What’s the revenue model?
3
. 
How much will we charge?
4
. 
Does this add up to a business that’s worth doing?
Revenue Sources
 (Figure 3.18)
While some of the issues differ from channel to channel, the process of
computing your company’s revenue is fundamentally the same, regardless of
channel. The good news: much of the work for this brief is already complete.
Question 1: How Many Will We Sell?
In the physical channel, companies generate revenue by selling their product,
collecting revenue either as a one-time sale, via time payments, or through
such financial tools as leasing or subscriptions. They also solicit referrals
from current customers, often rewarding customers for referring others.
Collect the following revenue stream components from hypotheses
completed earlier:
Market size and market share hypotheses, which should translate into
the anticipated number of customers (as in 10 percent of a million-
person market = 100,000 customers)
Channel hypotheses, along with estimates of their volume potential and
channel costs
Be sure to include (subtract, really) the channel’s cost of sales, which
can be enormous, since the company only gets to “count,” or keep, net
revenue received after channel costs are subtracted. (Enthusiastic
entrepreneurs make this mistake far too often)
Question 2: How Much Do We Charge? (Pricing
Tactics)
This is a two-part question. Part one assesses the costs of doing business. For
physical products, this is often far more important. If you’re selling canned
peas or microwave relay towers, there’s a clear, sizeable cost of the physical
product itself: parts, assembly, packaging, shipping, and more.
In business-to-business and some consumer sales, other issues warrant
consideration, such as total cost of operation (if rent is high or staff is huge,
or the electric bill is a high component of product cost).
Part two of the “how much will we charge” question is simple: “what’s
the price?” You will start testing your pricing hypothesis later in discovery,
but first there’s a bit more work to do.
A good pricing model recognizes Market Type, accommodates
manufacturing costs, the value the product delivers, market beliefs, and
competitive prices. It also charges “as much as the market will bear” to
maximize profits. For best results, start with a deep understanding of
competitive pricing.
Startups have lots of choices in selecting their pricing models. Among
the most popular pricing models:
Value pricing:
 Based on the value delivered by the product rather than
the cost itself. Investing or accounting software tools, unique patented
products and pharmaceuticals can sometimes optimize profits with this
model
Competitive pricing:
 Positions the product against others in its
competitive set, typically in existing markets
Volume pricing:
 Designed to encourage multiple purchases or users, in
situations ranging from office supplies to SAAS software
Portfolio pricing:
 For companies with multiple products and services,
each with a different cost and utility. Here the objective is to make
money with the portfolio, some with high markups and some with low,
depending on competition, lock-in, value delivered, and loyal customers
The “razor/razor blade” model:
 Part of the product is free or
inexpensive, but it pulls through highly profitable repeat purchases on an
ongoing basis. (Think of the cost of ink-jet printers compared with the
cost of the ink.) Often challenging for startups due to the upfront cost
Subscription:
 While now thought of as a software strategy, the Book of
the Month Club pioneered this for physical products
Leasing:
 Lowers the entry cost for customers. Provides constant
earnings over a period of years
Product-based pricing:
 Based on a multiple of actual product cost.
Usually for physical goods. (Typically priced for maximum
revenue/profit versus volume)
Two Business-to-Business Pricing Issues
Total Cost of Ownership/Adoption (TCO)
: More an issue in business than
in consumer sales, the TCO analysis estimates the total cost to customers of
buying and using the product. For business products, do customers need to
buy a new computer to run the software? Do they need training to use the
product? Do other physical or organizational changes need to happen? What
will deployment across a whole company cost? For consumer products,
measure the cost of “adopting” the product to fit consumer needs. Do
customers need to change their lifestyle? Do they need to change any part of
their purchasing or usage behavior? Do they need to throw away something
they use today?
Return on Investment (ROI)
: When setting prices for sales to
corporations, your company may have to prove to them the purchase price
was “worth it,” or that they got “a good deal,” which may be less about price
than about the total return on their investment. As a rule, companies focus
more on ROI than consumers do, partly because of the size of and oversight
on large transactions. ROI represents customers’ expectation of their
investment measured against goals such as problem-solving, productivity,
time, money and resources. For consumers, return often includes status or
style and sometimes even just plain fun.
When selling to businesses, prepare a hypothetical ROI in advance of
initial customer meetings. (This is often a good subject for a helpful white
paper.) If the solution doesn’t return a meaningful multiple ROI, sales may be
difficult. That $50,000 robot vacuum system as a replacement for a $5,000
annual cleaning bill may be a tough sell, especially after a good job on the
TCO (maintenance, electricity, parts and more) as part of the ROI
computation.
Question 3: Do Revenues Point to a Business Worth
Doing?
You have to do more than multiply the volume by the average selling price to
get the answer to this question, but don’t worry—this answer doesn’t need to
be precise just yet. Remember, the goal of customer discovery is to refine a
business model enough to test it on a larger scale in the next step, customer
validation. So at this point, with a rough view of the gross revenue and all the
fixed and variable costs involved, make a rough computation of the
following:
Is the revenue adequate to cover costs in the short term?
Will the revenue grow materially if not dramatically over time?
Does the profitability get better as the revenues get bigger?
Again, this is a rough, back-of-the-envelope calculation used only to
decide if what you found in discovery moves your forward to customer
validation. It’s not an accounting exercise.
Remember, you have limited resources. Focus first on the one key, big
source of revenue before expanding into secondary sources, which can be
distracting to the company.
Two More Revenue Issues to Consider
Distribution Channel Affects Revenue Streams.
 Calculating revenue is
easy for a product sold directly by your own sales force: You simply deduct
any discount you gave the customer from the list price of the product. When
you sell through indirect channels, revenue calculations might be harder.
Selling to Walmart is wonderful, but most retails channels have “return
rights.” (If your product doesn’t move off their shelf, you have to take it
back.) Are you selling to OEMs where the discount is steep and the revenue
to your company doesn’t appear until the OEM begins selling in volume?
Consider Lifetime Value
: How much will the customer ultimately spend not
just in the first sale but over the life of his or her relationship with the
company? SAAS software, dating websites, and online gaming focus on
customer lifetime value. Customers can sign up for 
salesforce.com
, for
example, sometimes for a few dollars a month, but the company no doubt
spends several times that amount to attract and sign a new user. Why?
Because it understands that the average 
salesforce.com
 subscription lasts
many months, making the new customer worth a multiple of the monthly cost
—provided, of course, that the company stays in business long enough to
collect the revenue. (On the other hand, the lifetime value of a demolition
contractor’s typical customer often approximates his first invoice.)
Customer lifetime value dramatically affects revenue stream and pricing
strategy, online or off, although other than magazine and newspaper
subscriptions, which are declining rapidly, there are scant few subscription
products beyond gym memberships among physical products.
Final Draft of a Business Model Hypothesis
 (Figure 3.19)
Tie the Components of Revenue Together in a
Hypothesis
Revenue stream and pricing interact with the value proposition, the channel,
customer relationships, and the other business model components. That
means there’ll be lots of iterating and pivoting. The revenue stream
hypothesis will be tested repeatedly before it’s cast in stone, first in customer
discovery discussions and again with more customers as part of customer
validation. When the draft of the revenue stream brief is complete, re-validate
it to see that the math adds up. Ultimately, only one answer matters: can we
generate enough revenue, profits and growth to make this business worth our
time and energy?
Completing the Hypothesis Development Process:
This brief completes the company’s only large-scale paperwork exercise. The
action now moves outside the building so you can start to understand what
potential customers need and to qualify or refine the initial hypothesis
assumptions. But before doing that:
Convene a team meeting where a large copy of the latest business model
canvas and briefs are taped to a wall. A summary of each of the briefs
should be adjacent to the canvas
All participants should read each of the business model briefs
Look at the summaries on the canvas, read the details in the briefs,
discuss them as a team, and look for obvious conflicts or
inconsistencies.
Founders, product development, engineering and operations teams
should again validate cost assumptions and changes
Return to the first hypotheses developed to be certain there’s no conflict
from one to the next. Does the sales channel make sense, for example, in
light of the pricing, need for installation, etc.? Will fewer customers still
adequately fund overhead and development?
Review and agree on the final versions of each hypothesis
Make certain the hypothesis summaries agree with the summary in the
appropriate business model box
Update the business model as appropriate
Now it’s time to move ahead and get out of the office, where customers
and facts live.
Checklist 12: Revenue And Pricing Hypothesis
Goal:
 See if the business model makes financial sense
Reference
: Chapter 4, Revenue and Pricing Hypothesis
How many will we sell?
     
  Market Size & Market share hypotheses
     
  Channel hypothesis
What’s the Revenue Model
     
  Sales?
     
  Subscriptions?
     
  Pay-per-use?
     
  Referral?
     
  Affiliate?
What Are the Pricing Tactics
     
  Value pricing
     
  Competitive pricing
     
  Volume pricing
     
  Portfolio pricing
     
  Razor/razor blade model
     
  Subscription
     
  Leasing
     
  Freemium
     
  Etc.
     
  Does it Add up to a Business Worth Doing?
Exit criteria
:
     
  The units/users, revenue model and pricing add up to a business worth
doing
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 4
Customer Discovery, Phase Two: “Get Out
of the Building” to Test the Problem: “Do
People Care?”
P
HASE
 2 
GETS THE TEAM “OUT OF THE BUILDING”
 to test the problem and to
answer three key questions:
Do we really understand the customer’s problem?
Do enough people really care enough about the problem for this to
become a huge business?
And will they care enough to tell their friends?
The next section, 
Phase 3
, will test to see whether the product offers a
compelling solution to customers who have said there’s a problem. When the
“problem” and “solution” questions are answered with a resounding “yes,”
product/market fit is achieved and it’s time to move on to customer
validation.
This phase includes five key steps:
designing experiments for customer tests
preparing for customer contacts and engagement
testing customers understanding of the problem and assessing its
importance to customers
gaining understanding of customers
capturing competitive and market knowledge
As this phase gets under way, here’s a reminder of the key rules from
the 
Customer Development Manifesto
 in Chapter 1:
Customer discovery is done by the founders
Hypotheses require testing. Testing requires experiments to be designed
Web surveys are nice, but always correlate them with face-to-face
customer feedback, even for web businesses
Customer meetings aren’t about learning whether customers love the
product, at least not yet. They’re about understanding the problem and
how urgently your potential customers need to solve that problem.
You’ll focus more on the product itself once you’re certain the problem
it solves is big enough to create a market worth going after
Initial hypotheses rarely survive feedback without iterations or pivots
Design Tests and Pass/Fail Experiments
At this point, your Phase One business model hypotheses are still just
“guesses.” In this phase you’ll turn those hypotheses into facts by getting out
of the building and 
testing
 them in front of customers.
Here’s an easy way to visualize this: think of a three-layer business
model. The bottom layer represents your initial vision of the startup. The
second layer outlines the detailed hypotheses you just developed in Phase
One. The third layer shows the tests you’ll conduct to verify and measure
each hypothesis, turning guesses into facts as you do, so that the business
model can be verified and measured.
Business Model/Hypotheses/Tests
 (Figure 4.1)
But how do you test? 
Rule number 6
 of the Customer Development
Manifesto says to 
design experiments
 and 
Rule 9
 says to do it with 
speed,
tempo
 and 
fast cycle time
. So the first step in running a test of your business
model hypotheses is to 
design simple pass/fail experiments for each test.
Next you run the tests, and then you gather the data and not only try to learn
something from the test but also try to gain some insight. The
Hypotheses/Experiment/Test/Insight loop is shown in 
Figure 4.2
 below.
Hypothesis/Design Experiment/Test/Insight
 (Figure 4.2)
Regardless of whether it’s a physical or web/mobile product, Customer
Development experiments are short, simple, objective pass/fail tests. You’re
looking for a strong signal in the noise. The pass/fail tests give you a “good
enough” signal to proceed.
Start by asking yourself, “What do I want to learn?” Then ask, “What’s
the simplest pass/fail test I can run to learn?” Finally, think about, “How do I
design a pass/fail experiment to run this simple test?”
For example, a Customer Relationships hypothesis for a physical
product may have assumed that for every 10 sales calls three people would
move into active consideration of buying. The experiment might be as simple
as making the same presentation to 30 prospects and having the experiment
“pass” by coming away with nine or more orders or letters of intent.
Tests
One of the things that trips up engineering founders is thinking that these
hypotheses tests have to be actual code, hardware or the real product. Most of
the time you can mock up the web page or create a demo or physical
prototype to elicit valuable learning. Nor do the tests involve large sums of
money or large amounts of time. When you get a strong “grab it out of your
hands” on, say, from four of your first ten customers, it’s OK to stop the test
and declare it a success. The goal is speed, learning and looking for a global
maximum (not a local maximum).
What’s a global maximum? Let’s say you run a free trial offer for three
days on your great new weekend getaway website and you get 50, then 60,
then 80 signups in the first three days. You might say, “Wow, 80, that’s
great,” and end the test. But on day four, the sun comes out. Had you run the
test for only two more days, you might have discovered your “global
maximum,” 500 signups a day. Only experience and good guesswork can tell
you how long to run a test, and while shorter is always better, be sure you’ve
given yourself the opportunity to reach your global maximum.
Global Maximum versus Local Maximum Response Rates
 (Figure 4.3)
The next steps in 
Phases 2
 and 
3
 and in 
customer validation
 provide
details on how to set up tests for both web/mobile and physical products.
Insight
The goal of these experiments/tests is not just to collect customer data. Nor is
it to simply get “pass” on the pass/fail experiments. And it’s not just to learn
something, though we hope you will.
It’s something more profound, intangible and what makes
entrepreneurship in the end still an art. It’s the fact that 
you’re looking past
the data – you’re looking for insight.
 Did you get thrown out of sales calls
time and again but you remembered someone said, “Too bad you don’t sell x,
because we can use a ton of those.”
Checklist 13: Design Tests
Goal:
 Devise experiments for testing the Business Model Hypotheses
Reference:
 Chapter 4, Design Tests and Pass/Fail Experiments
     
  List key areas to learn
     
  Design simplest pass/fail tests
     
  Run Tests
     
  Process for tracking learning and insights from test results
Exit criteria:
     
  Objective pass/fail tests for testing Business Model Hypotheses
     
  Process for tracking results
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Prepare for Customer Contacts
The next step in qualifying your business model hypotheses is to leave the
safe confines of your office and conference room and venture out to the real
world, where the people who will pay your bills live. Regardless of whether
you’re selling to large corporations or consumers at home, your friendly first
contacts are the people who will start your education about customers and
their problems. Better yet, they may 
become
 your customers.
Start with 50 Target Customers
The first step in this phase will be the hardest: contacting potential customers
who don’t know you, persuading them to give you some of their time, and
looking them in the eye.
At this stage, you’re less interested in big names and
titles or the “exactly right” consumers.
 
Start by gathering a list of 50 potential customers you can test your ideas
on. Fifty names sounds like a lot, but as you’ll soon see, you’ll go through
them quickly. A solid discovery effort will usually involve 10 to 15 customer
visits a week, and getting face-to-face with 50 people will probably require
contacting 200 customers or more. Where do the names come from? Start
with the people you know directly. Next, expand the list by scouring your
cofounders’ and employees’ address books, social-network lists (Facebook,
Google+, Twitter, LinkedIn, Jigsaw, etc.). Then call in every favor possible,
from friends, investors, founders, lawyers, 
recruiters, accountants to add
names to your list. Finally, use conference-attendee lists, trade media, and
any other source you can think of.
Even if you’re selling to businesses, right now your customers’ titles and
their levels in the organization are irrelevant. And if you’re selling to
consumers, whether they currently have the slightest interest in your product
or not is also inconsequential. What matters is what you will learn from them.
At this stage, 
you’re less interested in big names and titles or the “exactly
right” consumers
. You’re interested in finding people who will give you
some of their time and who you think even loosely fit the profile embedded
in your customer hypotheses. (In fact, calling on high-level execs now is a
waste of a great lead. You really have no idea what you’re saying yet, with
nothing more than untested guesses, and will regret making the call. Wait
until your business model and story stop changing on a weekly basis.)
While you’re building your contact list, simultaneously begin to develop
an 
innovators list
. What’s an innovator? These are the most innovative
companies, departments in companies, or individuals in your field who are
smart, well-respected and usually out in front of a subject. For consumer
products, they may be the “gadget freaks” everyone asks for advice or the
group of people others look to for help spotting a trend. You’ll use this list
two ways. First, you need to find and meet with the visionaries who are
known to “get” new ideas. Unfortunately most people view innovation as a
dangerous virus that must be kept out of their companies, while few others
look forward to hearing about and understanding what’s new. The few are the
people to talk to. Second, your innovators list will give you a great contact
list of industry influencers and potential advisory board members.
It’s hard if you’ve never called on someone you don’t know, but it’s a
lot easier if you carefully prepare a 
reference story
 that gets you in the door.
Develop a Reference Story
The first step in customer contacts is coming up with a reference story.
A reference story emphasizes the problems you’re trying to solve, why
it’s important to solve them, and the solution you’re building.
The story typically starts with an introduction: “Hi this is Bob at
NewBankingProduct Inc. I was referred to you by (insert helpful reference
name 
here), who said you were the smartest person in the (name your
market/industry).” Now give the potential customer a reason to see you:
“We’re starting a company to solve the long-teller-line problem, and we’re
building our new Instanteller software, but I don’t want to sell you anything. I
just want twenty minutes of your time to understand if you have the long-
teller-line problem and learn how you and your company solve your own
teller problem.”
The best introduction to a prospect is through a
peer.
 
What’s in it for your contact? “I thought you might give me some
insight about this problem, and in exchange I’ll be happy to tell you where
the technology in this industry is going.” Exhale.
Obviously, you’ll need to vary and tweak the story, but the goal remains
the same: get meetings scheduled (you can do this via e-mail but it’s a lot less
effective). This may sound easy on paper, but if you aren’t a professional
salesperson, it can be very hard. Nobody likes calling people they don’t
know. First-time practitioners of customer discovery stare at the phone, walk
around it, pick it up, and put it down without calling. But eventually you have
to “bite the bullet” and place the calls. And you know what? There’s nothing
more satisfying than hearing a potential customer say, “Why, yes, that’s
exactly the problem we have. I can spare twenty minutes to chat—why don’t
you come in Tuesday.” Yes!
Start the Appointment-setting Process
First, a few pointers:
The best introduction to a prospect, when you can manage it, is through
a peer within his or her company. For consumer products, it can be just
as challenging—how do you get hold of someone you don’t know? But
the same technique can be used: a reference from someone the prospect
knows
Start with an introductory e-mail or LinkedIn, Twitter or Facebook
message—preferably sent by whoever gave you the contact—explaining
the reason for the call that will follow and why the time spent in the visit
will provide value to the customer
Always start by mentioning the referral source, as in, “Steve Blank said
I should call”
Tell them that the meeting is not a sales call and that someone said they
were the smartest person in the industry and you want to get their
feedback.
Ask for a short amount of time: “I just need 15 minutes of your time.”
(You’ll get more)
Don’t talk product or features. Explain that the goal is an understanding
of the problems or issues in the market or product category, and explain
why the person’s time will be well used
Sometimes the best “meeting” is a friendlier, less “threatening” cup of
coffee that’s clearly intended to be an information exchange and not a
hard-boiled sales pitch. Guests will be more likely to accept and often
more relaxed, receptive, and open to talking
One of the mistakes entrepreneurs make is
confusing motion with action.
 
Companies that succeed in this phase often spend an entire week setting
up the meetings and at least several weeks conducting them. It’s a small price
to pay when compared with the years the team will spend driving toward
success. Each founder needs to have at least 10 (yes, 10) conversations a day
until you book enough meetings to fill your calendar.
One of the mistakes entrepreneurs make in this step is confusing motion
with action. Motion is a sent e-mail, a left voice-mail message or a note on
LinkedIn. Action is a two-way conversation. So 10 conversations may
require 25 e-mails, voice mails, Tweets, etc. Keep calling until the schedule’s
booked with three customer visits a day. Get used to being turned down, but
always ask, “If you’re too busy, who else should I talk to?” It’s helpful to
keep hit-rate statistics (were any lead sources or job titles better than others?).
The same approach works for consumer products. As a rule of thumb, every
50 calls should yield five to 10 visits. Before going out, plan the call from
icebreaker to conclusion and rehearse.
Build a master calendar of booked appointments and assign members of
the founding team to each one. Geography, proximity and logistics challenge
the time efficiency. Research the company in advance to personalize the visit
as much as possible. Don’t expect every customer to be able to react
thoughtfully to every question or have a valid opinion on every aspect of the
need or problem. Instead, plan to assemble a mosaic of answers that
ultimately provide depth of feedback on every question on your list.
Checklist 14: Prepare For Customer Contacts
Goal:
 Get meetings scheduled with potential customers to understand the
customer problem and whether the company’s proposed solution solves it
Reference
: Chapter 5, Prepare for Customer Contacts
     
  List of 50 initial target customers
     
  Develop a Reference story
     
  Craft an Introductory email
     
  Contact initiated
     
  Build a master calendar of booked appointments
     
  Expand the list of contacts
     
  Create the innovators’ list
     
  Create the initial list of advisory board candidates
Exit criteria:
     
  Meetings arranged targeted number of potential customers
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Test Understanding of the Problem and Assess Its
Importance
With your customer meetings scheduled, it’s time to get out of the building
and measure how serious and important the customer problems, passions or
needs are in the customer’s eyes. Are you solving an urgent “hair-on-fire”
problem or something that it would be nice to fix “someday?” Obviously, one
of those suggests a far larger market opportunity.
Develop a Problem Presentation
In contrast with a product presentation, a problem presentation is designed to
elicit information 
from
 customers. The presentation summarizes your
hypotheses about customers’ problems and about how they’re solving the
problem today. It also offers some potential solutions, to test whether your
assumptions are correct. This presentation is your icebreaker when you meet
customers. (You may have to do this for each “side” in multi-sided markets,
where the issues differ for buyers and sellers/users and payers.)
In contrast with a product presentation, a problem
presentation is designed to elicit information 
from
customers.
 
Developing a problem presentation is easy. Your hypotheses about
customer problems and their solutions were articulated in the value
proposition hypothesis in Phase 1. Put these assumptions into slides.
Consider something as simple as a single-slide presentation (see 
Figure 4.4
)
listing the perceived problems first, the current solutions in Column 2, and
your proposed solution in Column 3.
Customer Problem Presentation
 (Figure 4.4)
Hopefully you’ll never get to use your presentation. Your goal is to get
the 
customers
 to talk, 
not you. This is the biggest idea in Customer
Development.
 The real goal of the problem presentation is for you to capture
your hypotheses about what you believe, but unlike an existing company, you
aren’t trying to convince anyone you’re right. You’re there to listen.
Get the 
customers
 to talk, 
not you.
 
The Problem Meeting
When you have the slide done, be prepared to present it using a whiteboard or
simply one-on-one across a table. Remember, though, that “presenting” in
this context really means inviting the customers’ responses. So, after
describing your assumed list of problems in column 1, pause and ask the
customers what 
they
 think the problems are, whether you’re missing any
problems, how they would rank the problems, and which are must-solve
rather than nice-to-solve. You’ve hit the jackpot when the customer tells you
they will do anything to solve the problem.
The presentation must encourage discussion. Most people enter a
meeting room expecting to be “talked at,” especially in a first meeting with
someone viewed as a potential vendor. When using slides, at least half the
slides should create 
a “pause” that requires more than a yes/no response.
Better still, use no slides and perhaps a printed handout or two instead. These
kinds of questions stimulate a problem discussion:
We think these are the five top problems facing the industry. How would
you rank them as they affect your company?
If you have three major problems to solve (in this area) in the year
ahead, what are they and why do they make the “top three”?
How does your company evaluate new products? (price? performance?
features?)
What if a customer tells you that the issues you thought were important
really aren’t? Instead of feeling as if you’ve failed, realize you’ve just
obtained great data. While it may not be what you wanted to hear, it’s
wonderful to have that knowledge early on.
Summarize this discussion by asking two questions: “What’s the biggest
pain in how you work? If you could wave a magic wand and change anything
about what you do, what would it be?” (These are the “IPO questions.”
Understand the answers to these questions and your startup is going public.)
Casually ask, “How much does this problem cost you (in terms of lost
revenue, lost customers, lost time, frustration, etc.)?” You’ll use this number
later in the customer validation step, when you develop a presentation.
Understand How They Solve the Problem Today
With agreement on the problems and their cost, you can display Column 2 (in
Figure 4.4
), the solutions available today. Again you pause, ask the customers
what they think the solutions to the problem are, whether you’re missing any
problems, and how they would rank the viability of the existing solutions.
What you’re looking for here is an understanding of how customers solve this
problem today or how they think others do. If the problem is painful or
important enough, you’ll get interesting answers. While you’re at it, another
critical piece of information is who shares these problems. Are there other
consumers who do 
x
 or 
y?
 Other people in the same company? Others in an
industry? Others with the same title? A set of people with 
common problems
equals a common value proposition. This means you can describe the value
of your product in a message that’s understood across a broad audience.
“If you could wave a magic wand and change
anything, what would it be?”
 
Finally, for both corporate and consumer products, introduce the
company’s solution (not a set of features but only the big idea) in Column 3.
Pause and watch the customers’ reactions. Do they even understand what the
words mean? Is the solution evident enough that they say, “If you could do
that, all my problems would be solved?” Alternatively, do they say, “What do
you mean?” Then do you have to explain it for 20 minutes and they still don’t
understand? Ask how your solution compares with the current solutions you
just discussed. Once again, the point is not to deliver a sales pitch but to get
their reaction and a healthy discussion.
Of course, what you learn from these discussions depends on what sticks
after the meeting. Responses tend to blur together, so it’s helpful to take
hypothesis briefs along on visits. Look at the entire set. Before each call,
shorten the list to “What are the three most important things I need to learn in
the call?” Get at least those three questions covered. Take notes and listen
actively. Over time, as response to key issues crystallizes, begin to ask
different questions.
Think about ending a meeting with “Who are the three other smart
people like you I should talk to?” I want my contact list to always be getting
bigger. Another favorite closer is “What is it that I should have asked you?”
The answers have been known to keep meetings running for another half-
hour.
The 
Problem
 Meeting in a New Market
Using the problem presentation can be daunting in new markets, which lack
context, since it’s tough to solicit feedback on a problem folks don’t
recognize or 
realize they have. The classic (and tired) example of this is the
likelihood that if Henry Ford had asked customers what they wanted, they
would have said, “A faster horse.” Unlike an existing market where there are
customers who can name the basis of competition (features, price, needs, etc.)
new markets have no existing customers. But that doesn’t mean you should
sit in your office and simply build your vision.
Always ask, 
“What should I have asked?”
 
Problem meetings in new markets use the problem–and-solution
presentation to inform an entrepreneur’s 
vision,
 not to specify features. In a
new market, customer responses should provide additional insight, not
numerical data. In a new market one of the warning signs that you may be
hallucinating rather than have a vision is if you can’t find any earlyvangelists
who share your vision. (They share it by giving you an order, not a pat on the
back.)
Collect Information on Everything
Before concluding the visit, ask yourself, “What else can I learn?” Never
leave meetings, even bad ones, without learning three new things. I ask a
series of seemingly innocuous questions. What conferences or trade shows do
they attend? What blogs, journals, and magazines do they read? Who’s the
best salesperson they’ve ever seen? How do they hear about new ideas?
Imagine asking these questions across 100 or more contacts and you can see
yourself building a “customer order of battle”—a deep understanding of who
they are and how to reach them. Keep detailed records of all responses.
Develop a 
Customer Discovery Scorecard
.
Avoid the Big-Company Meeting Trap
There’s a special trap to watch out for when you call on big companies,
where employees tend to attend meetings en masse, Clearly detrimental to
open, freewheeling 
conversations with potential earlyvangelists that could
have been rich in feedback. To ensure maximum feedback at big companies:
Arrange one-on-one meetings with key targets (decision-makers, key
influencers, and heavy users) before and/or after group meetings to
gather individual feedback
Try to get the “big boss” alone since others are often reluctant to speak
up when he or she is in the meeting. They may also defer to him or her,
minimizing important “outlier” feedback
A possible approach to discovery with a big company is to bring your
entire startup “brain trust” to a peer-to-peer meeting with the company’s
leadership so the two senior teams have a forum to discuss the
opportunity
Always state the goal upfront: we want a better understanding of how a
trendsetter or industry leader confronts problems or challenges that
might be solved by a new product (flattery never hurts)
Amalgamate and “Score” the Customer Data
When the first “out of the building” problem phase is complete, summarize
the data, in a Customer Discovery Scorecard (
Figure 4.5
). The scorecard
provides a sense of whether there’s enough customer excitement around the
product to warrant further forward motion. The analysis should help gauge
whether the right people were contacted and whether enough earlyvangelist
candidates were identified. “Weight” the data to adjust the findings’
importance to company goals. In the process, some customers will be pursued
aggressively, others will be put on “hold” until the product becomes
mainstream, and some will be abandoned.
Don’t lose or ignore outlier comments. They may lead to new features or
different ways of selling or provide other suggested iterations for the business
model. Look at both the summary data and specific or unusual comments
from prospective customers.
Sample Customer Discovery Scorecard
 (Figure 4.5)
The scorecard rates six customers’ views on a new industrial battery,
using a score of 1 to 3, with 3 being highest. Rating checkpoints in this
example include:
“
Excited
” and 
“urgent need”
 are self-explanatory.
“Business-Impact”
 reflects how important or transformative will the
adoption of this technology be on the customer? Nice to have? Impacts a
division? Changes their entire business model?
“Work-around,”
 indicates that the customer has been solving the problem
with a home-grown solution.
“120 day”
 indicates how likely it is that the customer will sign a purchase
order in 120 days. Since this hypothetical company requires more funding
within six months, 120-day purchases are double-weighted (thus the 120×2
column).
“Key decider,”
 indicating that the conversation was with an empowered
buyer.
The actual scorecard might have tens, hundreds or thousands of lines,
but on this sample scorecard we’re just looking at a handful of customers. If
the six are representative, our sample scorecard suggests the need for more
discovery data. Why? Only Customers A and B reflect both excitement, and
an urgent need, for the product. Of those, only Customer A is an
earlyvangelist candidate, experiencing enough pain to attempt a work-around
solution. Even then, Customer A’s score is only 18 of a potential 21 points,
and he reflects uncertainty about buying the product within 120 days, neither
of which are signs of a rabid enthusiasm for the product. Some other
observations:
Customer A is likely to buy within the 120-day goal period
Forget Customer E for now, since excitement is poor despite the urgent
need. And conversations with a decision-maker are a long way off, as is
a buying decision
Approach Customer C in hopes of meeting the decision-maker, and
request another meeting with the decision-maker at Customer B
Don’t abandon any of the customers, since each acknowledges some
significant need for the product. Those not selected for further discovery
should be kept on ice and made part of the pipeline at a later date. Take
your time calling back Customer F
Develop a viable mechanism that properly weights
the key issues.
 
The average scores are also informative. The high “urgent need” average
suggests there may be non-product problems, such as an inadequate problem
presentation, ROI justification, or the need to reach higher-level folks during
customer discovery in general, since everyone recognizes a need for the
product but few are eager to buy. The poor 120-day score reinforces the
likelihood that product benefits weren’t described well and that the
price/value message was unclear, or perhaps the price/value itself needs a
pivot or an iteration.
Every product has a different set of variables to consider and score in
aggregating and assessing the customer discovery findings. The key is to
develop a viable mechanism that properly weights the key issues. Once the
scores are impartially applied, discuss the system’s accuracy. If it’s accurate,
score the entire set of customers. Don’t forget to study the outlier comments.
Checklist 15: Test The Problem And Assess Its
Importance
Goal:
 Measure seriousness and importance of the customer problem or need
as the customer sees it
Reference
: Chapter 4, Test Understand the Problem and Assess its
Importance
Develop the “Problem” presentation
     
  Perceived Problem
     
  Current Solution
     
  Startup’s proposed solution
     
  Top 3 things to learn at each customer call
     
  Two presentations for multi-sided markets
     
  Presentation rehearsed?
Create a Report card for collecting data
     
  Perceived problems, ranked by customer
     
  Cost
     
  Current solution
     
  Startup’s solution
     
  Referrals
Create a Scorecard for results
Exit criteria
:
     
  Problem presentation developed and rehearsed
     
  Report card for collecting data at each call
     
  Scorecard for results
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Gain Customer Understanding
In addition to checking your assumptions about customer problems, you need
to validate your hypotheses about how customers actually spend their days,
spend their money and get their jobs done. Whether the product is for
corporate customers, a social network, or a new consumer electronic device,
you want to understand in detail how their lives or jobs work, how their
work/design flow happens and how they currently solve the problem or fill
the need.
If they’re in a business, are their jobs done in isolation? If not, how do
they interact with other departments? What other products do they use? Is the
problem they’ve identified limited to them, or do others in the company share
it? Is it possible to quantify the impact (dollars, time, costs, etc.) across the
entire organization? The same questions work for consumers. Will they use
the product themselves? Does it depend on others or their friends and family
using it?
You’ll want to check your assumptions about whether and how much
people will pay for your solution. What would make customers change the
way they do things? Price? Features? A new standard? If the customer’s eyes
haven’t glazed over yet, dip your toe into the hypothetical product spec. “If
you had a product like this (describe yours in conceptual terms), what
percentage of your time could be spent using the product? How mission-
critical is it? Would it solve the pain mentioned earlier? What would be the
barriers to adopting a product like this?” (If you’re a founder who has been in
the industry you’re entering, you may already be a domain expert and already
bring deep customer understanding.)
Since someday soon your startup will have to create demand to reach
these customers, use this opportunity to find out how they learn about new
products. Who are the visionaries in the press/analyst/blogging community
whom they read? Whom they respect?
Finally, never pass up an opportunity to spot talent. Can these customers
be helpful in the future? For the next round of conversations? For an advisory
board? As a paying customer? To refer you to other customers?
Your goal, after enough of these customer conversations, is to be able to
stand up in front of your company and say, “Here were our hypotheses about
our customers, their problems, and how they worked. Now here’s what
they’re saying their issues really are, and this is how they really spend their
day.”
Your goal is to understand the customer in depth. What does 
in depth
mean? It’s impossible to know their jobs as well as they do, but you should
be so thoroughly conversant with what truly matters to customers that you
can discuss their issues convincingly.
In business-to-business companies, experience the customer at work, or
at the very least observe it. Spend a day behind a cash register, at a trade
show, or at a conference the target customers are likely to attend. Buy lots of
coffees and have lots of casual conversations. Your goal should be to know
the customer you’re pursuing, and every aspect of his or her business, so
deeply and intimately that they start to think of you and talk to you as if you
were “one of them.”
Know the customer you’re pursuing so deeply they
think you’re “one of them.”
 
Checklist 16: Gain Customer Understanding
Goal:
 In-depth understanding of potential customers
Reference:
 Chapter 4, Customer Discovery, Get Out of the Building to Test
the Problem. Do People Care?
  
Research and Customer interviews
     
  How customers’ money and time are spent
     
  Current workflow
     
  Pain or need
     
  Current solution and cost
     
  How workflow would change with startup’s product
     
  Customer publications
     
  Customer influencers
  
Spend a day doing what customers do
  
Attend customer events
  
Report card for recording information learned
  
Process for analyzing data collected
Exit criteria
:
     
  In-depth understanding of customers, what they read, who they listen
to, how they work, spend leisure time and money
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Capture Market Knowledge
With a better customer understanding under your belt, it’s time to round out
your understanding of the overall marketplace. Meet with companies in
adjacent markets, industry analysts, people in the press, and other key
influencers. Go to industry trade shows and conferences to understand the
shape and direction of the market you’re about to create.
When you start a company, you should have some vague notion of what
companies are in adjacent markets or are part of the infrastructure or
ecosystem of your business. Through your own contacts, but usually through
introductions, take peers out to lunch. In exchange, gather information—not
competitive information but answers to questions such as: What are the
industry trends? What are key unresolved customer needs? Who are the key
players in this market? What should I read? Whom should I know? What
should I ask? What customers should I call on?
What will motivate these people to meet? Most won’t do it out of the
goodness of their hearts; rather, they’ll meet to make a “trade.” They’ll learn
about a key problem and its solution in exchange for providing their industry
knowledge and insights.
Just as you did with your problem presentation to potential customers,
don’t present or sell—just listen and learn. Spend the time to take a few of
the friendliest customers to lunch and ask them who they see as potential
competitors, both internally and externally. Who do they think has similar
products? Who else is an innovator in this space? Has this solution been tried
elsewhere in their company? Is anyone else inside their company trying to
build this product? It’s amazing how much you can learn from the people
who will eventually buy your product.
Ask the same questions of peers in adjacent markets, and after practicing
on them, try to make contact with the key industry influencers and
recommenders listed in 
Phase 1
 and ask them the same set of questions.
It’s a rare company that doesn’t have a website. These provide a treasure
trove of information, literally available at one’s fingertips, about competitors,
the market, and the industry where the company plans to compete. Start by
Googling the problem and reading perhaps the first few hundred links. Be as
specific as possible in selection of search terms, and try several different
searches for maximum information. This effort leads to a wealth of market
information, including news about the category, companies providing
solutions, key blogs and websites addressing the industry, industry experts,
and consultants.
Take competitors to lunch.
 
Then dive deeper into each competitor uncovered in the initial search.
Find out not only what they say about themselves but also what others say
about them—positive and negative. Try to discern key product features and
selling points, which help differentiate the new offering from competition.
Collect industry and competitive press releases, studies, and reports, and
follow the thread to the consultants, researchers or pundits who wrote them to
see what else they’ve said.
Next, start gathering quantitative market data. More than likely, Wall
Street analysts issue reports on the market or adjacent markets. Get copies of
all of these reports. More important, actually read them. Understand what the
analysts believe are the trends, the players, business models, and key metrics.
Finally, industry conferences and trade shows are invaluable and
essential. Never say, “I’m too busy to attend.” Attend at least two key
conferences or trade shows (the important ones picked in 
Phase 1
). Not only
do they provide great trinkets, but conferences and trade shows are the prime
areas for both talent-and trend-spotting. Ask usual questions about trends and
players, but this time accomplish a few things that can’t happen anywhere
else. Get demos of competitive and adjacent products. Get your hands on the
products themselves, get competitors’ literature, talk to their salespeople, and
generally immerse yourself in your new industry. Attend as many conference
sessions as possible, listening to others describe their products. What are their
visions of the future, and how do they compare with your own newly
developed value proposition?
After testing the customer problem (or need) and gaining a complete
understanding of the customer, it’s time to expose the product itself to
potential customers for the first time. Not to sell to them but to get their
feedback. Before doing so, be sure to update the hypotheses and business
model wherever changes are indicated.
Checklist 17: Capture Market Knowledge,
Traffic/Competitive
Goal:
 Gain understanding of overall market
Reference
: Chapter 4, Capture Market Knowledge
Meet with peers in adjacent markets, industry analysts, journalists,
other key influencers
     
  Industry trends
     
  Key unresolved customer needs
     
  Key players
     
  Must-read/Must-ask/Must-meet
     
  Potential competitors/Innovators in the space
  
Research!
     
  Trends
     
  Key players/Influencers
     
  Business models
     
  Key metrics
  
Construct a Competitive grid
  
Construct a Market map
  
Attend Industry events
     
  Demos
     
  Hands-on time with competitive and adjacent products
     
  Spot talent, trends
Exit criteria
:
  In-depth understanding of the overall market, its trends, players, current
products and vision for growth
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 5
Customer Discovery, Phase Three: “Get
Out of the Building” and Test the Product
Solution
S
TEVE’S PHONE RANG AND THE VOICE ON THE
 end said, “You don’t know me
but I just read your book and think I need your help.” That was the day we
got to know one of the most innovative startups within a “Fortune 500”
corporation (#6): General Electric’s Energy Storage division.
Prescott Logan, the unit’s brand-new general manager, recognized that
his unit’s new sodium industrial battery was a disruptive innovation, which
GE traditionally does well, but aimed at a market where the end users were
unknowns. Logan realized his division looked more like a multimillion-dollar
startup with all the usual startup uncertainty, but located within a huge,
execution-oriented company. He needed a framework or architecture to help
his team deal with a “white space” 
market and apply startup “search” and
customer discovery principles at a company known for “six sigma”
execution.
Energy Storage was buying capital equipment, breaking ground on a
massive factory, and out making sales calls—in full “execute” mode, the way
most big companies work—based on a ton of diligence and an external
consultant’s 30,000-foot view of the opportunity, but not likely having had
enough face-to-face end user conversations.
Soon after the call, the customer-facing team came to the ranch to map a
customer discovery plan. They had a clear fix on the “customer problem”
(life cycle, wider range of operating temperatures, etc.), and knew how they’d
take the well-vetted innovation from the lab to manufacturing, but one
question remained. Who would buy it in volume, and why? In two days of
brainstorming, the Customer Development process offered GE the following
initial observations:
The new GE battery should serve dozens of market segments, not just
the two they’d selected: backup systems for cell towers and data centers
They needed to look many more customers in the eye to validate the
market selection
Product managers were spending too much time in Schenectady, N.Y.
headquarters, where there were no customers and no answers.
Customers were outside the building
With an existing global customer base, GE had plenty of access to
potential customers
They needed to find earlyvangelists, essential when launching new
technology like GE’s, and determine the earlyvangelists’ characteristics
as well as how to find them
They needed a formal process to review what discovery data they’d
gathered to date to understand how different the value proposition was
for each market segment—and where the opportunities might be greatest
for a high-performance, more expensive alternative to lead-acid
industrial batteries (far bigger versions of the one in your car)
What other business model “boxes” would customers like them to
change in order to sign a purchase order? The GE team uncovered
several including changing the product features themselves, making the
product somewhat configurable, and offering leasing and other
alternative financing models
Prescott grasped Customer Development faster and better than anyone
we had ever seen. The Energy Storage division was a startup. All the rules for
managing and launching product line extensions—business plans and
revenue models—didn’t work. They needed instead to first test their basic
hypotheses about their business model.
Leaving the ranch, Prescott and team joined the million-mile club as
they flew across the U.S. and to Asia, Africa and the Middle East, meeting
face-to-face with dozens of prospects, suspects, and influentials to explore
multiple potential new markets and applications. They did their best to leave
PowerPoint decks behind, and listen to customers’ problems, needs, and
frustrations with the battery status quo. Unscripted, open-ended discussions
with a wide range of prospects were conducted worldwide to listen about
how prospects bought their batteries, how often they used them, and the
operating conditions. In one target market, Prescott actually relocated a top
customer development team member and his family to India and said “don’t
come home til you get a purchase order signed,” which he did, learning
immensely about how his target segment customers might use the battery and
—more important—how they’d evaluate and buy.
Talking to a wide range of prospects, the team soon found more market
segments, and even though they aren’t huge businesses yet, they’re promising
because the product’s unique capabilities “unlock” far more value for users in
certain segments. For example, the battery’s small footprint and
environmental friendliness make it a far better choice as a backup to
computer systems in high-rise office buildings, where real estate is expensive
and the floors often can’t hold the weight of massive lead-acid battery arrays.
In one case, they found an architect who said “I don’t really care what it
costs, I want it.”– the precise definition of an earlyvangelist!
It was customer discovery and early validation on steroids, driven by a
passionate entrepreneurial CEO (though Jeff Immelt has that particular title)
who’d stand up against any valley startup leader. Prescott’s boss, GE VP
Tina 
Donikowski, provided cover while the team executed the thorough,
honest search process any startup must have, rather than the six sigma
execution drills that made GE so famous. And Prescott chose people who
didn’t fit the typical big company mold: “white space” thinkers who lived for
the search and embrace the unknown.
While the jury is still out, and the business is a long way from its huge
revenue goals, this team of passionate entrepreneurs hiding in a 
“Fortune 6”
company have just about posted a “sold out” sign on the factory for its first
six months of operation. We think that sign has a good chance of being up for
a while.
“Test the Solution:” an Overview
The previous phase tested the customer 
problem
 or need and explored
customers’ passion for it, This phase tests whether the 
solution
 to that
problem—the value proposition—gets customers’ enthusiastic enough to
buy/use the product. This phase has five steps:
Update the business model and team—a Pivot or proceed point
Create the product solution presentation (physical channel) or the high
fidelity MVP test (web/mobile)
Test the “product solution” (physical channel) or begin to measure
customer behavior (web/mobile channel)
Yet again, update the business model and team
Identify the first advisory board members
Update the Business Model and Team 
(a Pivot-or-
Proceed Point)
With a far deeper understanding of customers and their problems, it’s time
for an important pivot-or-proceed pause in the Customer Development
process. While some startups have already pivoted, every entrepreneur should
use this step to take a pause and review the collection of customer feedback
about the problem and its importance. Those findings, coupled with extensive
customer, industry, and competitive research, have taught the company a
great deal about its customers, how they work or play, the market, and the
problem the company has been founded to solve. This learning makes it a
near-certainty that at least some business model hypotheses need to change.
(When a substantial change is made to one or more business model
hypotheses, it’s a pivot.)
Start this phase by gathering as much of the company management as
possible (not just the founders and VPs but directors and managers as well),
along with key investors, for the pivot-or-proceed review. Share everything
that’s been learned, with a focus on customer feedback regarding the
importance or severity of the problem or need—the potential product/market
fit. The group also reviews new findings that may affect hypotheses or
assumptions made in Phase 1, adjusting them where appropriate. These can
often include the value proposition or product specs, customer segments,
pricing, and revenue model assumptions.
Start by Assembling the Data
Before the meeting, the Customer Development team gathers all the customer
data and builds a work-flow map of the prototypical customer. At the meeting
itself, the spokesperson for the team diagrams and describes how customers
actually do their job and whom they interact with. This provides a reality
check of the customer hypotheses. Keep diagramming and drawing until it’s
easy to explain how customers’ businesses and lives work today, including
how they spend their time 
and money. Compare this description with the
initial hypotheses. (While corporate customers may have more formal
organization to diagram, a consumer will have more external influencers to
track.)
With the customer work flow and interactions fully described, dive into
the real news. What problems did customers say they have? How painful are
these problems? Where on the “problem scale” are the customers you
interviewed? How are they solving these problems today? Draw the customer
workflow with and without your product. Is the difference dramatic? Did
customers say they would pay for that difference? In general, what did you
learn about customers’ problems? What were the biggest surprises? What
were the biggest disappointments?
Question 
Everything
Once the Customer Development team has presented its findings, the fun
begins. You can now ask the most difficult question. Given all that’s been
learned from talking to customers, how well do the preliminary product specs
solve their problems? Dead on? Somewhat? Not exactly? If the answer is
“somewhat” or “not exactly,” this meeting becomes a soul-searching,
company-building exercise. Is it because the right people weren’t
interviewed? Failed to talk to enough people? Because nobody asked the
right questions? This assessment is critical because of a fundamental
assumption of the Customer Development model: before changing the
product, keep looking for customer enthusiasm. If and only if no customers
can be found for the product, discuss changing the feature list.
People who talk to customers tend to collect a list of features that, if
added, will get one additional customer to buy. Soon there’s a 10-page
feature list just for selling 10 customers. In contrast, in Customer
Development the goal is to have a single-paragraph feature list that can be
sold to thousands of customers.
What if everyone believes you’re talking to the right customers but the
feedback says you’re building the wrong product? Something has to change.
Don’t continue building the product and think miracles will happen. Either
get back outside the building and find a different set of customers who will
buy the product or consider changing the features.
Assuming the product is at least a partial fit for customers’ problems,
continue examining the product assumptions and specs. Based on customer
feedback, review the Phase 1 feature list. Prioritize the features in terms of
their importance to the customer. Can the Customer Development team
match each feature to a customer problem? If not, why not? While figuring
out what features to ship is important, knowing which features don’t matter is
equally important. Which features did customers not care about? Can any
features on the product spec be deleted or deferred? Remember, in a startup
the Customer Development team isn’t supposed to be adding features; it’s
supposed to be finding out the 
minimum
 feature set, based on input from
visionary customers.
Next, review and get agreement on the delivery schedule, again revising
Phase 1 assumptions as necessary. As noted earlier, visionary customers,
particularly in corporations, will be buying into the entire vision, not just the
MVP. 
They will need to hear what the company plans to deliver over the next
18 months
.
Earlyvangelists need to hear about the 18-month
product roadmap.
 
Finally, as a group, review the other 
Phase 1
 hypotheses. (Now it’s clear
why writing them all down was important.) Given all the feedback from
customers, which of the four market types is the company in? Why is it
different? What are its competitive advantages? Do the initial pricing and
delivery channel assumptions hold up? What was learned about influencers?
Pivot or Proceed
Regardless of channel, this step concludes with the first of many pivot-or-
proceed discussions. Management and investors affirm they’re confident
they’re the company has uncovered a problem in which a sizable enough
universe of customers is clearly eager to solve. If not, it’s time to rethink the
value proposition and attack a more severe problem or a need of greater
interest or urgency to a larger customer universe. If the universe is eager to
solve the problem, the group moves on to present its potential product
solution to customers.
...summarizing customer findings is not an
accounting problem.
 
One last thought: Collecting and summarizing customer findings is not
an accounting problem. You aren’t simply adding up the number of
responses. You’re looking for learning, meaning and insight in the data. And
more than anything, you’re looking for hordes of customers who will try to
rip the product right out of your hands so they can have it before their friends
or competitors.
Checklist 18: Update The Business Model And
Team
Goal
: Prepare to assess whether to move ahead or pivot
Reference
: Chapters 3,4, 5, Customer Discovery
  
Assemble the Customer Data
     
  Build a Workflow map of prototypical customer
     
  Customer workflow with and without new product or app
  
Detailed findings from customer interviews
     
  Problems customers have
     
  Pain level
     
  How the problems are being solved
     
  What was learned
     
  Biggest surprises/Biggest disappointments
  
Assessment of data
     
  How well preliminary product specs solve customers’ problem
     
  Product/market fit
     
  Review and prioritize features list
     
  Features matched to customer problem
     
  Customer interest/enthusiasm quantified
  
Review the Phase 1 hypotheses
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
     
  Update the 18-month delivery schedule
  
Pivot-or-proceed discussion
Exit criteria
     
  Determine whether the company has uncovered a problem that many
customers are eager to solve, or if the Value Proposition works
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Create the Product “Solution” Presentation
Once product development and Customer Development teams agree on the
revised hypotheses, the next step is to assemble the first product “solution”
presentation. This presentation is emphatically 
not
 the presentation used for
fundraising or recruiting. Nor is it the problem presentation just used with
customers in Phase 2. Toss those slides out and start over. This presentation
tests the revised assumptions about the product itself. It’s a 
solution
presentation
 confirming that the product fits a serious customer problem or
need. Customers confirm their interest by expressing interest in buying or
using the product.
The presentation should cover the five (no more!) key product features
and the problems they solve. Include a story about “life before the product”
and “life after the product” where appropriate. Draw the customer’s work
flow or the consumer’s day “before” and “after” the product. Leave out all
the marketing, positioning and fluff. Close with the product vision (from the
value proposition “vision” hypothesis) at least 18 months out.
Leave plenty of room and “cues” in the presentation to prompt customer
feedback. Rehearse. Remember that this is still not “selling,” but an effort to
uncover whether the product is salable. Learn enough so that when selling
begins, the team is confident that customers will be eager to buy.
Here’s the product/solution presentation outline:
     
Review the problem.
 Start by reminding the audience about problems the
product is designed to solve and why a solution is important if not urgent.
Pause here to re-validate the importance of solving the problem. As
surprises emerge, return to 
Phase 2
.
     
Describe the solution
. Demonstrate the product if possible; even sketches
or prototypes of key concepts or features help customers understand.
Pause to probe for a reaction. Do customers agree it solves the problem?
     
Draw the customer work flow
 before and after the new product. Validate
the “before and after” work flow. Describe who else in the customer’s
organization the solution might affect.
     
Understand the value equation:
 Some customers will pay almost anything
for a product that solves a serious business problem. Sometimes, third-
party features enhance value when added. Keep pricing discussions fluid,
and identify the key values a prospect sees. Watch for pleasant upside
pricing opportunities.
The product/ “solution” presentation should take no more than 20
minutes. In the next step, you’ll present it to customers and 
listen to their
feedback
.
If an MVP doesn’t exist, a demo or prototype will make the discussion
more effective. This is why fashion designers make one actual dress and
show it to buyers, car companies build one “concept car” to display, and why
toy companies make one or two nonworking Styrofoam prototypes of the
latest toys and games to show buyers. The more an MVP looks, feels, and
works like the product, the more informed the customers’ reactions will be.
Obviously, this is far easier in some product categories than others. (Try
prototyping the new 787 jetliner, for example.) Equally obvious: the closer
the MVP is to a touchable, usable prototype, the fewer slides are needed for
the solution presentation.
Checklist 19: The Product/ “Solution” Presentation
Goal
: Develop a solution presentation for use with customers to confirm the
product solves a serious customer problem or fills an important need
Reference
: Chapter 6, Create the Product/Solution Presentation
  
Develop a Solution-oriented presentation
     
  Review problem
     
  Describe product (five key features)
     
  Insert multiple prompts for customer feedback
     
  No marketing or positioning information
  
Draw the Customer workflow diagram
     
  Before the product
     
  After the product
     
  Product future 18 months out
  
Develop a Demo or Prototype where possible
  
Keep a Scorecard to track customers’ reaction
Exit criteria
:
  Detailed presentation that sets out the customer program, shows the
startup’s solution and invites additional customer feedback
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Test the Product Solution with the Customer
With the solution presentation complete, decide which customers to visit.
Earlier, your “problem discovery” visits should have reached at least 50
potential customers. Try to deliver this solution presentation to every
qualified prospect who heard the problem presentation. Expand the original
set of customer contacts to include at least 10 potential customers for
complex products like enterprise software, and many more for consumer
products. These new contacts keep the momentum going and lay the
groundwork for selling something during customer validation.
This time, test previous assumptions about the titles of people who will
make the purchasing decision. Return to the customer types described earlier,
and interview several of each type to get a full spectrum of feedback. Find
prospective saboteurs wherever possible, with an eye to spotting patterns in
their job titles. With the call list in hand, create an introductory e-mail,
reference story and sales script, and then get out of the building.
Solution Presentation
Begin by reminding the audience what problem the product is designed to
solve and why the company believes solving the problem is important. With
agreement on the problem and its significance, it’s finally time for the
solution presentation you developed earlier (most entrepreneurs have wanted
to do this since Day One, so you should be ready by now). Demonstrate the
product, rough prototype or MVP wherever possible for maximum impact.
Now it’s time to listen. After hearing the solution description, how do
customers think it solves their problem. Do they think it’s different? Do they
think the product is creating a new market, or is it a better version of an
existing product (and, if so, better in what way)? Or do they yawn or shrug?
Check other hypotheses. What do 
customers think about the proposed
revenue model and pricing? What are comparable prices for this kind of
product?
Use a post-visit 
“report card”
 to consistently record feedback.
Remember, this isn’t a sales call, but an exploration to see whether customers
believe the product is a strong solution to an important problem—and to
gauge whether the solution is strong enough to get them to buy when the
product’s ready.
“Show Me the Money” Questions
When talking to visionary customers about big-ticket b-to-b products, ask
several questions to test adoption. “Would you deploy our software
enterprise-wide if it were free?” Tests the seriousness of a potential customer.
If the customer isn’t ready to deploy the software even for free, you’re
obviously talking to the wrong person. When a customer is willing to
visualize the pain of rolling out your product, ask how they would deploy it,
how many users would use it, what groups would get it first, the criteria
they’d use to measure its success, and so on. By the end of this visualization
exercise, potential customers are sometimes mentally installing and
deploying your software.
Be sure to get to the “who has the money” question. There’s nothing
more frustrating than having a series of great customer meetings for months
only to find out very late in the sales cycle that no department has the budget
or that new capital purchases are made on an annual cycle that just closed.
Ask if a current budget exists for products like this and which department or
individual would have the budget. The information will be critical when
assembling the sales roadmap.
Pricing Questions
Explore the pricing boundaries. Ask, “Would you pay $1 million for our
software?” The answer is usually instructive. Suppose customers said, “we
couldn’t see paying more than $250,000 for the first set of applications.” In
their minds, they had already bought the product and the bill just came due.
The first number out of their mouths was usually what they had in their
immediate budget or the initial purchase price.

Sample Customer Discovery Report Card
 (Figure 5.1)
Once you get a first number, ask, “How much more would you expect to
pay for professional services (the customization and installation)?” Most of
the time they’ll say that that cost was included in their budget number, but
some add to that figure. Then push and see whether they would spend those
extra dollars every year or ask, “What would we have to do to get you to
spend twice that? Three times that?”
After a few of these customer exercises, you’ll understand your average
selling price and sense the lifetime value of a customer.
Channel Questions
What about distribution? Test these assumptions by asking customers how
they would most likely buy. Retail store? Online? Direct sales? Distributor?
From there, as time allows, explore how marketing might reach the customer
with questions like:
If you were interested in a product like this, how would you find out
about it?
How do you find out about other new products like this?
Do you ask others for their opinions before buying? If so, whom?
Do you or your staff go to trade shows?
What industry-specific magazines or journals do you read? What
business publications?
For consumer products, ask what general-interest publications,
newspapers, bloggers or websites would best connect with the consumer
“Get/Keep/Grow Questions”
Next, probe the customers’ product acquisition process. For corporate
products, ask, “How does your company buy products like this? Walk me
through the approval cycle. Who is involved?” Software entrepreneurs should
be forewarned that many Fortune 500 companies, too often burned,
automatically reject software offerings from startups that haven’t reached
their fifth birthday. If it’s a consumer product, understand the buying process.
Is this an impulse buy? Do they buy only known brands? Items advertised on
TV?
Presentation Tips
A few tips to smooth the way:
Don’t attempt to ask every question in each solution interview. Some
customers will know more about one aspect of the product than another
Opt for one-on-one discussions over large-group meetings. You’ll get
more detail and more thoughtful opinions
Convert the discussions into a rough sales pipeline based on people’s
interest in buying
It’s better to find and stop work on or delete unnecessary features than
features to add new ones. The goal is an MVP now!
It’s optimistic to expect customers to share all this information at the
first presentation or to expect every customer to know enough to answer
every question. Try to accumulate answers to all the questions over the
course of all the customer visits. Completing this phase signifies a complete
understanding of customers’ problems and a solid grip on their level of
product interest.
Meet the Channel
If any form of indirect sales channel will be involved, one more group needs
to see the solution presentation your potential channel partners needs to see.
While it’s too early to sign up channel partners with formal commitments,
meet them now and understand what it would take to get them to sell the
product.
What do channel partners need to hear or see from early customers?
How do customers access their channel?
Is it the kind of product they’d sell proactively?
Do they want articles in the business press, product reviews and
customers calling them and asking for the product?
Do they seek financial inducements such as shelf-stocking fees,
guaranteed returns or—worse—a “guaranteed sale” policy that allows
them to return unsold merchandise?
Channel partners won’t magically know how to position or price the
new product. For products in an existing market, it’s easy to tell them, “It’s
like that other one you sell but faster.” For re-segmented and new markets,
indirect channels have a harder time understanding how to position products.
Spend time understanding channel partners’ motivations and incentives, and
soliciting their feedback about features, pricing, sales opportunities and more.
Understand each channel partner’s business model. Why? There’s no
way to understand how much channel partners should order or how much
they should charge customers unless 
their
 business model is clear. See how
other companies do it. Take other executives to lunch and ask about margins
and discounts. The worst that could happen is that they won’t disclose the
information. Keeping all this in mind, assemble a channel/service partner
presentation and stress what’s in it for the partner. Partners are usually
fondest of things on which they make more than just margin—some like
products that require installation, service or ongoing supplies, such as paper
and toner for copiers. Finally, hit the streets to start a dialogue and learn
about their business:
How do companies establish a relationship with them?
Do they hear their customers asking for a product like yours?
How does a potential partner make money? (By project? By hour? By
reselling software?)
How does their business model compare with others in their business?
What is the minimum dollar size for a transaction of interest to them?
Understand each channel partner’s business model well enough to draw
it on a whiteboard
Checklist 20: Test The Product Solution With The
Customer
Goal
: Gauge whether customers believe the product is a strong solution to an
important problem and if they’ll buy it
Reference
: Chapter 5, Test the Product Solution with the Customer
  
Prepare for the Meetings
     
  Introductory e-mail
     
  Reference story
     
  Script
  
Conduct Customer Interviews
     
  Customers who heard first “problem” presentation
     
  Targets on expanded set of contacts
     
  Several of each customer type
     
  Use demo, prototype or MVP to describe product
     
  Indirect sales – potential channel partners
  
Develop a Customer report card to record feedback
     
  Product and features
     
  Intended market
     
  Pricing
     
  Distribution
     
  Referrals
  
Thank-you notes
Exit criteria
     
  Solid understanding of customers’ problems
     
  Robust customer interest in product
     
  For indirect sales, be able to draw each channel partner’s business
model
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Update the Business Model Again
(Another Pivot-or-Proceed Point)
Here you’ll update the business model to reflect the latest round of customer
discovery “solution” findings and how they do or don’t affect the elements of
your business model. Think of it as a “tune up,” since you’ll conduct a
thorough business model review in the next phase.
Your focus here is totally about customers’ enthusiasm for the product,
and the conversation should be about pass/fail test results, not opinions.
Your business model should undergo regular
updates.
 
Look for Massive Customer Enthusiasm
This is the time to remember that 
lukewarm response to any product or the
problem it solves is a serious, red-alert danger signal
 that calls for an
iteration or a pivot rather than an automatic step forward into customer
validation. Discuss the percentages as well as the number of customers
visited who express rabid or significant enthusiasm for the product and high
confidence that it solves an important business problem or fills a high-priority
consumer need. What’s the team’s honest appraisal of how many customers
would run out and buy it immediately? How many would tell all their friends
or associates? Did any or, better, many declare the best possible vote of
confidence, “I don’t care if it’s not complete or perfect—I want it now”? Start
the conversation by sorting customer reactions into the following main
categories:
     
Category 1:
 Customers unequivocally love the product, and no changes
are needed.
     
Category 2:
 Customers like the product, but we’ve heard consistently that
they want this or that additional feature at launch.
     
Category 3:
 Customers can understand the product after a long
explanation, but no one was jumping over the table to buy it.
     
Category 4:
 Customers don’t see much of a need for the product.
If most of the customers fall into Category 1, congratulations! If the
business model components “add up,” as reviewed in the next step, it may
well be time move on to customer validation.
Regardless of channel, customer discovery sought a market for the
product as originally spec’ed. The most dangerous customer responses lie in
Category 2: “We need more features.” As emphasized earlier, knowing which
features don’t matter is as important as knowing which features to ship first.
Balance customer reactions with development time, since it may take much
more product development effort to earn a convincing Category 1 answer.
Why? Because the joke is true: “Normal people believe if it isn’t broke, it
doesn’t need to be fixed. Engineers believe if it isn’t broke, it doesn’t have
enough features yet.”
The natural instinct of Engineering is to keep adding features. But
customer discovery is a race to get the MVP into paying customers’ hands as
quickly as possible, so fewer features or an MVP that’s just “good enough”
are far better than losing a month or even a week’s worth of customer
feedback. Ask whether any features can be deferred. Let early customers help
determine which features and functionality to add and in what sequence.
Listening carefully to the right customers delivers a product strategy with a
high likelihood of success in any channel.
Answers in Categories 3 and 4—customers aren’t jumping over the table
or don’t see a need—are typical during a first round of customer discovery.
At a minimum, they require serious thought and probably a pivot that
involves restarting 
Phase 1
 from the beginning rather than continuing forward
on a death march to failure. This makes for a challenging board meeting but
is often a critical turning point for investors and company alike. For
technology products, lukewarm customer response can indicate a profound
problem, usually characterized as the lack of product/market fit: not enough
of a market for the product or a lack of robust demand for a product in a vast
market.
Repackaging the Product—A Pivot Strategy
Other issues are sometimes referred to as positioning but more accurately
described as “product repackaging.” Product repackaging is a problem most
technology startups have to deal with at some point. A technology-driven
startup’s first product is usually determined by the founding product
development team. Often the product development team has a perfect feel for
what the customers’ needs are and how the customers want to buy the
product. But most of the time they don’t. If they haven’t been intimately
connected to the customer, the initial product configuration needs further
refinement by the Customer Development team. While the core technology
might be spot-on, its match for customer needs or purchase preferences can
be off. A single monolithic software package might be too expensive or too
complex to sell that way. Technology repackaging might solve the problem
by reconfiguring the product features. Perhaps it can be sold as modules, or
as a subscription service, or with increasingly featured versions, without
requiring Product Development to completely reengineer the product. This
problem must be caught and dealt with in customer discovery or it may affect
the company’s ability to survive.
Update the Business Model Canvas Again
Regardless of channel, this series of analyses and discussions will almost
certainly affect some of the business model hypotheses. Most likely to be
affected is the value proposition, since this first “solution discovery” effort
helps shed light on whether people think the product solves the problem in a
way that compels them to buy. When it doesn’t, the value proposition is the
most likely suspect for adjustment, whether features are added or subtracted
as a result.
Customer segments should be reviewed, since the product may have
resonated well with some segments and not others. If, for example, the
product generates excitement only among a subset of the intended market
(men, not women; managers, not staff people), that discovery will affect the
revenue stream hypothesis as well. The team will conduct a thorough review
of the business model in the next phase, so this is best thought of as a tune-up
that updates the model to reflect the latest round of customer discovery
“solution” findings.
Checklist 21: Update The Business Model And
Team
Goal
: Prepare to assess whether to move ahead or pivot
Reference
: Chapters 3,4, 5, Customer Discovery
  
Assemble the Customer Data
     
  Build a Workflow map of prototypical customer
     
  Customer workflow with and without new product or app
  
Detailed findings from customer interviews
     
  Problems customers have
     
  Pain level
     
  How the problems are being solved
     
  What was learned
     
  Biggest surprises/Biggest disappointments
  
Assessment of data
     
  How well preliminary product specs solve customers’ problem
     
  Product/market fit
     
  Review and prioritize features list
     
  Features matched to customer problem
     
  Customer interest/enthusiasm quantified
  
Review the Phase 1 hypotheses
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
     
  Update the 18-month delivery schedule
  
Pivot-or-proceed discussion
Exit criteria
     
  Determine whether the company has uncovered a problem that many
customers are eager to solve, or if the Value Proposition works
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Identify First Advisory Board Members
As good as any founding team may be, invaluable people outside the
company who can’t be hired full time will often be willing to help in an
advisory capacity. These advisers can help solve technical problems,
introduce key customers, provide domain-specific knowledge, and share
business expertise and wisdom. Throughout customer discovery, when
meeting customers and analysts, prospecting for advisory board members
should always be in the back of everyone’s minds.
Product Development should engage some advisers for specific help in
designing and building the product, and a business mentor, someone who’s
been through the startup grind before, may also be helpful. One or two
customer voices typically stand out from the crowd. Engage these people by
asking them for advice, taking them to lunch or dinner, and seeing if they’re
interested in helping. Formalize the advisory board process later, during
customer validation.
Read more about the 
advisory board structure and organization
.
Checklist 22: Identify First Advisory Board
Members
Goal
: Begin to identify first advisory board members
Reference
: Chapter 5, Identify First Advisory Board Members
  
Potential advisors approached
     
  Technical problems
     
  Key customer introductions
     
  Domain-specific knowledge
     
  Product development
  
Potential advisors approached
Exit criteria
     
  Initial list of advisory board prospects
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 6
Customer Discovery, Phase Four: Verify
the Business Model and Pivot or Proceed
H
AS YOUR CUSTOMER DISCOVERY EFFORT
 turned your hypotheses (or guesses)
into hard facts? Do you believe it’s time to proceed to customer validation,
when you test whether your business model can scale?
There are three critical questions to answer:
1
. 
Have we found a product/market fit?
 Is there sizable demand for solving
the problem, and does the product fill that demand well in the
customers’ eyes?
2
. 
Who are our customers and how do we reach them?
 Do we understand
the demography and archetypes of our key target customers and enough
about their behavior to know how to find them cost-effectively?
3
. 
Can we make money and grow the company
? Can we grow predictably
and large enough to make a great company?
If your answer to this analysis is “proceed,” remember that it’s still not
time to launch. This go/no-go decision answers only one question: do we
have enough 
confidence in customers’ enthusiasm and the product/market fit
to proceed to customer validation and see if our business model scales by five
times, 10 times or more? It’s often frustrating to entrepreneurs who make the
“go” decision, since they’re rarin’ to get out and start doing and selling. After
all, that’s what entrepreneurs do. It’s also a dangerous trap: customer
validation accelerates spending, which—if unsuccessful—can cost you your
job, your equity, or both. (As we’ve said, this process isn’t easy.)
Is This Business Worth Doing?
 (Figure 6.1)
Bring your team and investors to a “full stop” to answer the questions
above. At a bare minimum, whether you Pivot or Proceed is the subject of an
entire board meeting. Generally this assessment forces at least one return trip
back to the start of the discovery process. This is the norm! (It’s far better to
find out now, before more years of 100-hour workweeks are invested.)
Have We Found a Product/Market Fit?
Product/market fit has three components:
Is the problem or need that’s addressed urgent or vital to 
lots
 of
customers—i.e., is there a market? (Replace “lots” with a real “pass/fail”
number.)
Does your product solve the problem or fill the need at a price customers
will gladly pay? (Insert real number from business model, of course.)
Are there enough customers (insert number) “out there” to deliver a
sizable (insert number) business opportunity?
This checkpoint is important enough to take these questions one at a
time. (If you’re uncertain or want more data, there’s a deeper exploration of
this set of questions at the end of 
Chapter 11
.)
Are you attacking a serious problem or filling a
compelling need?
This question should have been thoroughly probed directly with customers
both online and, more important, face-to-face. Have you consistently heard
enthusiastic responses like “This is a high-priority problem (or need) near the
top of my list?” If they add comments like “I’d pay anything to solve this
problem” or “My patchwork solution isn’t good enough,” even better. Probe
only for a high level of consistent enthusiasm. That defines a market
opportunity.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Did your customers have friends or colleagues with similar problems or
needs, and did they think the problem was important enough to discuss it
with, or refer it to, their friends or coworkers?
Were many of the customers you met attempting home-grown or
workaround solutions to the problem your product will solve?
Did most customers rate the problem or need’s severity at 8, 9, or 10 on
a scale of 10?
Did most customers rate the pain caused by the problem at or near 5 on a
scale of 5?
Review the before-and-after customer work-flow diagram.
Was the difference dramatic after buying the product?
Were customers palpably excited?
Did customers say they would pay for that difference?
Does your product solve the problem or fill the need
for your customers?
Review all the customer feedback report cards, summaries, and analysis—
there should be quite a pile of it. Here again, as with validating the problem
question, be sure there’s robust enthusiasm for the product, even in its MVP
form. Look for comments like “I have to have this now” or “Everyone I know
will want one” or “When can I get it?” Lukewarm or average enthusiasm
seldom delivers scalable startups. Be objective and park entrepreneurial
enthusiasm at the door.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Did the minimum viable product generate significant “buy” or “engage”
enthusiasm?
Was the product exciting enough to stimulate significant customer
referrals? Did those referred customers buy or engage at an encouraging
rate?
Did the long-term product vision generate highly positive customer
feedback?
Is the latest product-features-and-benefits hypothesis still appropriate
and profitable?
Did the long-term product-delivery schedule generate purchase
enthusiasm?
Also review the delivery schedule, revising assumptions as necessary.
Customers are buying into the entire vision, not just the MVP, and need to
hear how and when the product will evolve.
Are there Enough Customers to Deliver a Sizable
Business Opportunity?
Did customers verify that they’d buy at the level you expected? Did any
competitive or other data emerge pointing to larger or smaller market share?
Review your initial TAM (total addressable market) and SAM (serviceable
market) hypotheses and compare those estimates with what customers
actually said. How much do they buy, how often, and are their friends or
colleagues similarly inclined? Check findings against market knowledge and
competitive analysis data gathered in Phase 2.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Have you validated the TAM and SAM for your market?
Is the market size as you expected, and is it verified by customer
feedback and industry data?
Is the market growing significantly, with strong growth prospects?
Do customer conversations verify that they’ll buy repeatedly and refer
others to do the same?
Did any unexpected competitive threats emerge?
The hard question to answer here is how many customers are “enough.”
This question must be answered by founders and investors together, with
everyone on the proverbial “same page” about longer-term goals for the
company and whether results to date point toward achieving those results.
These results differ widely by channel and product type. A few
generalizations:
Enterprise software:
 Three or four earlyvangelists showing very strong
interest might well be enough, provided that the team has at least as
many more enthusiastic prospects in the pipeline. Where possible,
customers should come from multiple segments, and few or no segments
should be far behind the others in terms of interest in the product
Capital equipment:
 The “three or four” enterprise software rule applies
here, too, as a rule, but a closer look at results of customer discovery
with a broader range of customers is helpful. Are most prospects
interested in the 
product largely as spec’ed, or does everyone want some
form of customization? Do discovery results point to a robust pipeline,
acknowledging that the sales cycle for capital goods can be quite lengthy
Consumer products:
 Whether it’s a new skateboard or a flat-screen 
TV,
more than a handful of earlyvangelist customers is almost certainly
required—perhaps 20 or 30 or more. It’s also important to establish
serious interest in the channel where you expect to sell the product. If 15
people want to buy your skateboard, that’s probably not convincing
enough for the Walmart buyer, for example
Web/mobile applications:
 Since customer discovery efforts should reach
at least several thousand prospective users or customers, a web/mobile
app should almost certainly activate at least 100 apps or downloads to
say it’s seen “enough” customer response. You should also watch the
percentages, to be sure the conversion rate is encouraging
Social networks and “network effect” startups:
 These should probably
attract at least 500 if not 1,000 active, engaged users to be able say
they’ve attracted “enough.” If the site or app is free or a freemium (free-
to-paid), that number should be at least three times—preferably five
times—larger, since it’s so much easier for a user to say “yes” to
something that’s free. Monitor the activation rate, and look as well at the
percentage of users who are returning regularly—say, three times a
week—since they’re not only an indication of customer volume but also
point to the customers’ quality and engagement
If the team is talking to the right customers but feedback says the
product is wrong, something has to change. Reassess your customer segments
and get back outside to find a different set of customers, or consider changing
the features, product configuration, pricing, or other business model
elements.
Checklist 23: Verify Product/Market Fit
Goal:
 Verify that the company has identified a serious problem, has a
product that will address that problem and that there are enough customers
willing to pay for that product.
Reference
: Chapter 6, Verify Product/Market Fit
  
Assessment: Serious problem or important need?
     
  Number of customers with the problem
     
  How customers rated problem
     
  Whether customers attempted home-grown solutions
     
  Workflow diagram with and without new product
  
Assessment: Does product addresses product or need?
     
  Customer feedback reviewed
     
  Amount of customer enthusiasm for product
     
  Referral rate
  
Assessment: Are there enough customers?
     
  Market size, now and anticipated
     
  Customer feedback
     
  Competitive threats
Exit criteria
:
     
  Verify sizeable demand for solving the problem
     
  Verify that the product fills the demand well in the customers’ eyes
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Do We Know Who Our Customers Are and How to
Reach Them?
The previous step assures that there are customers “out there” who want your
product. But do you know how to find them and sell to them with an
affordable marketing or “get customers” budget? This verification step starts
by ensuring that you know “what a customer looks like.”
Can you draw a customer archetype for each of your key customer
segments? Does it clearly point you to places where you can find them?
Can you draw a day in the life of a customer so you know how to pitch
the product to him?
Did some segments respond better, faster, or with larger orders than
others?
Did any new segments emerge, or should any be eliminated?
Do customers recognize big improvements in a “day in the life” of
users?
Do you know what your customers read, trade shows they attend, gurus
they follow, and where they turn for new product information?
Can you draw your channel map, showing how the product moves from
your startup to its end user, along with the costs and marketing/sales
roles of each step in the sales channel?
Try to measure your “get customers” cost and response rates objectively.
Review the real, “all in” costs (including staff time, overhead, whatever) of
activating or selling, say, 50 customers. When you add up all the costs (not
just the ad or AdWords costs themselves, for example), are you still confident
of your ability to get lots more customers at roughly the same cost per
customer?
Look beyond your total “Get” budget to identify which programs were
most cost-effective, and do some homework to be sure that if, for example,
you quintupled your e-mail marketing budget, results would quintuple as
well. This is the time 
to figure out how much you really need to spend to get
one (or 50) good customer(s), since you’re about to head to customer
validation, where spending will increase by a factor of 10 if not more!
If a significant amount of customer feedback has given you high
confidence in all these answers, there’s one more step—determining whether
you can consistently acquire customers at the costs outlined in your “Get”
hypotheses. Your early tests of the Get programs should have given you a
good sense of that, so review the data collected. Don’t worry if the costs are a
little high, since you’ll be optimizing those programs as you ramp them up
during validation.
Be sure to update the business model based on any changes in customer
acquisition costs discovered in this review, since they’re often the largest
costs your startup will confront.
Checklist 24: Verify Who Customers Are and How
to Reach Them
Goal
: Verify that company knows its customers and how to reach them
Reference
: Chapter 6, Verify Who Customers Are
     
  Customer archetypes
     
  Day in a Life of a Customer
     
  Customer responses assessed
     
  Customer behaviors, influencers assessed
     
  Channel map
     
  Costs assessed for each step of moving product
     
  Updated business model reflecting changes in customer acquisition
costs
Exit criteria
:
     
  Detailed understanding of who the customers are, how to reach them
and what it costs to get them
     
  Update the Business Model Canvas
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Can We Make Money and Grow the Company?
Assemble Revenue Model Data
By this point, the team has assembled a massive amount of hard data about
pricing, revenue, costs and acquisition and marketing costs, among others.
The data needs to be verified, with any gaps filled in along the way, which
may entail returning to learn more in further customer, channel, or product
development discussions. The most important hard data to review includes:
summary of customer report cards, indicating potential sales revenue
expectations over time
market size estimates
channel cost and revenue potential summaries
pricing plan
customer acquisition costs
detailed information about the industry, the customers, and their
behavior
competitive product and pricing information
Combine this data to create an accurate net revenue forecast for at least
the next four quarters of the company’s existence—the customer validation
phase—and, if possible, another year beyond that. This shouldn’t be a
precise, to-the-penny estimate by any means. Instead, it’s more of a rough
“gut check” to be sure that the company will emerge from customer
validation as a growing, profitable business. Take a close look at 
Figure 6.2
, a
hypothetical analysis of a company selling both via its own website and
through a physical channel. Average cost of customer acquisition is 40% of
revenue in this example. The data assembly is a four-part process:
1
. 
Compute the “best estimate” of total gross revenue the company will
receive 
directly
 from customers, quarter by quarter. Review results of
customer discovery report cards and “get customers” program tests as
well as market 
size estimates to estimate the company’s direct revenue
from customers quarter by quarter.
2
. 
Next, compute the amount of 
channel
 revenue (other than direct revenue
for sales to end users, from which the company receives 100 percent).
Review the channel costs (margin, rep fees, promotional costs, etc.) and
deduct them from channel revenues.
3
. 
Add the net channel revenue to the total direct revenue by quarter to
figure total company revenue. Deduct quarterly operating costs from the
revenue.
4
. 
Compute all the costs of acquiring customers, recognizing that they will
most certainly change quarter by quarter, both as the company spends
more money on its “get customers” effort and as it acquires customers
more cost-effectively.
Sample Financial Analysis
 (Figure 6.2)
The computation should deliver a reasonable rough estimate of the
company’s revenue expectations across its next four (or, preferably, eight)
quarters. Consider developing this entire exercise three different ways, using
a “good/better/ best” approach that delivers three different forecasts or
business cases: high, best guess, and worst case.
This analysis all by itself may stop the pivot-or-proceed process in its
tracks, as it often does, if the computation shows the company running out of
money within the year. The spreadsheet is a simple example of a rough “cash
burn” 
computation that should be enough to send any smart founder back
through the discovery and validation processes, considering that the company
runs out of money 90 days from moving forward.
Looking at an analysis like this, the founders and investors should be
highly nervous about proceeding to spend nearly $2 million on customer
creation activities. The startup in this example has several options:
Raise another few hundred thousand dollars immediately in order just to
survive the year ahead
Reduce the spending on operations or customer acquisition costs
Cut staff or reduce founder salaries until break-even is achieved
Without taking any of these steps, the company will clearly not survive,
and it must return to refine its business model.
Key questions to review and discuss:
Have you translated market and market share findings into potential unit
sales and revenue?
Have you validated your pricing model with customers?
Are volume, demand, and purchase-frequency hypotheses validated?
Were any unanticipated channel costs uncovered, such as sales reps’
salaries or promotional fees?
If the market is multi-sided, have all costs of generating “buy”-side
revenue been estimated?
Does this rough forecast point to a scalable, profitable business with
substantial exit value?
Checklist 25: Verify Can We Make Money
Goal:
 Determine whether the company can be profitable
Reference
: Chapter 6, Customer Discovery, Verify Business Model/Pivot or
Proceed
  
Revenue Model Data
     
  Summary of customer report cards, indicating potential sales revenue
over time
     
  Market size estimates
     
  Detailed information about the industry, customers, their behavior
     
  Competitive product and pricing information
     
  Channel cost and revenue potential summaries
     
  Pricing plan
     
  Customer acquisition costs
  
Accurate net revenue forecast for the next 4-8 quarters done three
ways (good/better/best)
     
  Direct revenue
     
  Net channel revenue
     
  Total revenue
     
  Acquisition costs
     
  Basic operating costs
     
  Cash burn
     
  Cash at quarter end, by quarter
Exit criteria
:
     
  Reasonable rough estimate of the company’s revenue expectations
across next four-eight quarters
     
  Update your business model canvas
Pivot or Proceed?
This is either the beginning of the end or, more likely, just the end of the
beginning. It’s where you must acknowledge that an estimated one idea in
thousands morphs into a scalable, profitable big company with an exit value
of $100 million or more. The company has put a stake in the ground with a
series of hypotheses and tested its assumptions. Potential customers have
validated the product, and a base of prospects has evolved. And all the
learning is captured in writing in the updated business model canvas and its
supporting hypothesis documents. Now it’s time to honestly assess if the
modified hypotheses provide a sound foundation for moving forward—not to
launch—to a larger-scale test in customer validation.
Summary questions to review and discuss:
Have we identified a problem lots of customers will eagerly pay to have
solved?
Does our product solve these needs distinctively, cost-effectively and
profitably?
If so, do we have a sizable market and a viable, scalable and profitable
business model?
Can we draw a day in the life of our customer before and after purchase
of our product?
Can we create an organizational chart of users, buyers and channels?
The hardest question is simple and needs an honest answer: do the
customer discovery findings point to a big enough market that’s hungry for
the product? This is often a painful question and, sadly, more often than not
leads back almost to the beginning of customer discovery. While it’s a defeat
of sorts, it’s far better to confront this question honestly and candidly,
ensuring that the business model, 
properly executed, points to a repeatable,
scalable, profitable business opportunity. Without one, the company faces a
painful road to ignominy.
Exhausting as the customer discovery process is, it often requires
multiple iterations to fully understand the market and discover customers
who can’t wait to buy. However, it’s never been easy to find the Holy Grail.
Until you do, take everything learned in Phases 1 through 3 to heart, modify
the presentations, go back to 
Phase 1
 and do it again. Try out several markets
and users. Does the team need to reconfigure or repackage the product
offering? If so, modify the product presentations and go back to 
Phase 3
(solution presentation) and do it again.
If the team votes “all systems go,” there are two more steps to complete
before taking a deep breath and moving forward into customer validation.
Determine the Validation Checkpoints
It’s wonderful to have lots of soft, fuzzy metrics of success, but they seldom
deliver success to startups. Be sure that every hypothesis has a clear,
measurable “validation checkpoint” and that those checkpoints tie into the
business model. A few examples of the kinds of checkpoints to test in the
customer validation phase:
Physical channel/business-to-business checkpoint examples:
We can close a sale in three meetings
One of six prospects will buy if we get to talk to VPs of finance
Customers will expand the number of users of our service by 25 percent
after six months
Customers will place an average of two orders per month
On to Customer Validation? Congratulations!
If you’ve gotten this far, you’ve changed your hypotheses many times. Some
were iterations, others were pivots. One of the best techniques to see how far
you’ve come is to show the canvases as a series of snapshots over time. You
can do this by putting them up on the wall or clicking through a series of
PowerPoint slides. Either way, this visual presentation of the hypotheses and
your tests to turn those guesses into hard, cold facts, is the final step in
determining whether it’s time to move on to the next of the four steps,
customer validation.
If it’s time to move to the next step, congratulations! This is a major
achievement and warrants celebration. Customer discovery is the most
challenging, powerful step you’ll encounter in Customer Development:
defining a product, an offer, a channel and pricing for a product that
consumers are eager to buy. Hold on to all the information collected from
customer interviews for use throughout the phases of customer validation,
when actual selling will develop a sales roadmap for the company.
Customer discovery is an exhausting, sometimes-frustrating process.
However, it’s the foundation of Customer Development and thus the
foundation of a successful, scalable business. The checklists found
throughout this book recap the phases of this step, the goals of each phase,
and the deliverables proving that the goals have been met. With that done,
take a well-earned vacation or a long weekend to celebrate. You’ll need to
rest up before moving on to customer validation.
Checklist 26: Verify Business Model – Pivot or
Proceed
Goal:
 Assess whether the modified hypotheses provide a solid foundation for
moving forward to larger-scale testing in Customer Validation
Reference
: Chapter 6, Customer Discovery, Verify Business Model/Pivot or
Proceed
  
Modified hypotheses assessed
     
  Problem/need identified
     
  Product solves product/need
     
  Sizeable market
     
  Viable, scalable, profitable business model
     
  Day in the Life of the Customer, with and without product
     
  Organizational chart of users, buyers and channels
  
Clear, measurable Validation Checkpoints identified
Exit criteria
: Full, honest assessment of Customer Discovery effort:
     
  Is there a big enough market that’s hungry for the product?
III
Step Two:
Customer Validation
Chapter 7:
Introduction to Customer Validation
Chapter 8:
Customer Validation, Phase One:
“Get Ready to Sell”
Chapter 9:
Customer Validation, Phase Two:
“Get Out of the Building and Sell!”
Chapter 10:
Customer Validation, Phase Three:
Develop Product and Company Positioning
Chapter 11:
Customer Validation, Phase Four:
The Toughest Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
Overview of the Customer Validation Process


CHAPTER 7
Introduction to Customer Validation
Along the journey we commonly forget its goal.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
E
.PIPHANY’S
 
FOUNDING HYPOTHESES WERE
 typically pretty straightforward
and “investable” in the mid-1990s, when software companies were
automating everything from accounts payable to network security, sales force
processes and even wine-cellar inventories. “Why not automate the marketing
department?” asked the founders, meeting in their modest living room. “After
all, most of the tasks like press releases and data sheets and customer letters
are repeatable processes.” Venture capital was raised and the company began
to build its product based on the founders’ vision.
However, the company’s initial idea of who the customer was and the
problem they wanted to solve was just plain wrong. The company’s later
success was due to the four passionate entrepreneurs’ willingness to listen to
customers and to the three painful pivots driven by customer feedback.
The Browser Breakthrough
During the ’90s, large corporations acquired different software applications to
automate each part of their enterprise—finance, customer support,
manufacturing, and sales among them. But the data these applications
collected were accessed via reporting tools from the IT organization. More
important, the data existed in “virtual silos,” with each functional system
walled off from the other. The finance system didn’t talk to the sales system,
which didn’t know that the manufacturing system even existed. Queries like
“Compare the sales data of green dresses versus blue ones with current
inventory for each by store, and contrast the gross margin by region to
calculate discounts” were virtually impossible to answer to because they
required combining data from three incompatible applications. As a result, it
could often take days or even weeks to get a simple inventory-detail report.
E.piphany’s then-radical notion was to provide managers
anytime/anywhere drill-downs and analysis in real time, without IT, through
a revolutionary new technology called a web browser. One of the company’s
key hypotheses was that the product should be a great fit for companies with
lots of customers, tons of data on each one, and a recurring need for fast new
data-driven, microsegmented marketing campaigns.
An Epiphany at E.piphany
Early on, E.piphany assembled an advisory board. A key adviser was the VP
of database marketing at Schwab. She was incredibly generous with her time
and said the system might work in their application. She introduced the
company to five other database marketing executives, who essentially said,
“If you get a system working at Schwab, we’ll have to buy one as well.” You
couldn’t get much better than that. E.piphany had found its first
earlyvangelist and first market.
But each time Schwab’s people looked at the system’s technical details,
they politely said our product was missing a key feature for database
marketing. It took two meetings before the founders realized they understood
her problem, all right, but the solution—the underlying database schema of
the software—was missing the most important feature for solving it. It didn’t
include “householding,” and without this feature, she could never buy the
E.piphany system. (Householding, well-known among database marketers,
recognizes that two or more people at the same physical address live together
and, in Schwab’s case, often invest together. This feature was crucial to
direct-marketers who didn’t want to send multiple or differing ads to the
same address.) And no amount of sales and marketing hand-waving was
going to fix the problem.
It was a major mistake. Until this meeting, the founders hadn’t
understood the customer problem well enough to provide the correct solution.
E.piphany’s co-founders, Ben Wegbreit and Steve Blank, joined the
Schwab VP, and her engineering team in a deep technical discussion of what
the software needed to do for Schwab’s business and what was needed. Ben
asked five or 10 questions, everybody nodded and the meeting ended. On the
long ride back to E.piphany’s living-room office, Steve asked, “Ben, how do
we solve Schwab’s problem?”
After a moment of silence, he replied, “Show them page 6 of our
product spec.”
“What do you mean page 6? Our spec only has five pages!”
Ben looked at Steve and smiled. “Not anymore.”
They had just pivoted the product and refined the minimum feature set.
E.piphany’s first order from Schwab came the week after they demo’ed
householding. Other orders followed soon after. A week later, the founders
sat down to figure out what other feature they would toss out to make room
for this one.
E.piphany would go through two additional equally painful pivots
before its initial public offering, but that “householding” pivot sold the
founders on the “power of the pivot” value.
The meeting and car ride from Schwab to the company headquarters
illustrates the customer validation process every startup needs: a method for
validating the business model with real customers and orders.
Customer validation turns hypotheses into facts about basic questions
like:
     •   Do we understand the sales/user acquisition process?
          
   Is it repeatable?
          
   Can we prove it’s repeatable? (If our business model is single-sided
commerce, the only acceptable proof is enough full-price orders.)
          
   Can we get these orders/users with the current product?
     •   Have we tested sales and distribution channels?
     •   Are we confident we can scale orders/users into a profitable business?
     •   Have we correctly positioned the product and the company?
The Customer Validation Philosophy
Customer validation attempts to “test sell” at every stage. It runs a continuing
series of quantitative pass/fail tests to 
determine whether there’s strong
enough product/market fit to justify scaling sales and marketing spending.
Most of your testing effort will be asking people to give you an order or
engage with your app or website. At this point, you’re testing the entire
business model, not its individual components, even as you learn more details
about some, like price or channel.
Just as customer discovery was disorienting for experienced marketers,
the customer validation process turns the world upside down for experienced
salespeople and, in particular, those with sales responsibility. All the rules
sales executives learned while selling in physical channels at large companies
are 
not
 applicable to startups. In fact, they’re positively detrimental. It’s not
all about the launch party!
In the customer validation step, 
you are not going to hire and staff a
sales team.
 You are not going to execute to a sales plan or “the sales
strategy.” The reality is 
that you don’t know enough yet to do any of these
things. At the end of customer discovery, you have in hand firm hypotheses
about who will buy, why they will buy, and at what price they will buy. But
until those hypotheses are validated—with customer orders—they’re all little
more than educated guesses, even with the work invested to develop them.
From Business Model Canvas to the Sales Roadmap
In customer discovery you tested some of the hypotheses of your business
model:
Value proposition:
 You affirmed it with a few dozen to a few hundred
people
Customer segments:
 You have a hypothesis about customer archetypes
Customer relationships:
 You tested several “get, keep and grow”
activities
Channel:
 You understand your key channel partners, and some have
expressed interest
Revenue model:
 The company has an idea of how to price its offering
A sales roadmap uses all you’ve learned from customer discovery to
guide the creation of a sales funnel specifically for your company. It answers:
Who influences a sale? Who recommends a sale?
Who is the decision-maker? Who is the economic buyer? The saboteur?
Where is the budget for purchasing the type of product you’re selling?
How many sales calls are needed to make one sale?
How long does an average sale take from beginning to end?
What is the selling strategy? Is this a solution sale?
If so, what are “key customer problems?”
What’s the profile of optimal visionary buyers, the earlyvangelists every
startup needs?
Unless a company has proven answers to these questions, few sales will
happen, and those that do occur will result from heroic single-shot efforts. Of
course, on some level, most sales VPs realize they lack the knowledge they
need to draw a detailed sales roadmap, but most believe they and their newly
hired sales team can acquire this information while simultaneously selling
and closing orders. This is because most executives new to startups confuse
searching for a business model with the execution of a known business model.
A sales roadmap is part of the 
search
 for a business model. Only after it’s
built can it be executed. Startups can’t learn and discover while they’re busy
executing. As we can see from the rubble of any number of failed startups,
attempting to execute before you have a sales roadmap in place is pure folly.
Building a Sales Roadmap Versus Building a Sales
Force
Given how critical the validation step is, a CEO’s first instinct is to speed up
the process by spending more on customer acquisition or adding salespeople.
The reality is, this doesn’t speed up the validation phase. In fact, it most often
slows it down. Instead, you’ll build a roadmap to figure out how to get
repeatable sales (by explicitly testing product/ market fit). Once that’s done,
then
 build a sales organization.
Developing a sales roadmap is part of the search for
a business model.
 
In an existing market, customer validation may simply validate that the
sales VP’s rolodex or contact list is relevant, and that product performance
metrics the company identified in customer discovery were correct. In a re-
segmented, clone or new market, even a rolodex of infinite size (or tripling
the AdWords budget) won’t substitute for a proven business model and a
tested sales roadmap.
For an experienced sales or business development executive, these
statements about customer validation are heretical. All the actions in
Customer Development we consider to be mistakes are what traditional sales
professionals have been 
trained to do. It seems counterintuitive and
disorienting. So let’s look more closely at why the first sales in a startup are
so different from later-stage sales or selling in a large company.
Founders Must Lead the Customer Validation
Team
Founders who complete customer discovery often mistakenly ease up and
delegate customer validation activities to Sales, Business Development,
Marketing or Product Management. This is a bad idea. Middle and junior
managers aren’t likely to be good at customer validation, which requires
creative searching, probing, and turning on a dime—not execution of a
repeatable process.
Why must the founders lead? First, founders and only founders call the
shots on pivoting. To do so, they must hear about flaws in the product or
business model 
directly from the customers.
 Nothing else has the same
impact. Anyone other than a founder who learns of a serious product or
business-plan flaw faces two challenges: he or she doesn’t have the authority
to pivot, and he or she seldom has the courage to report bad customer
feedback to the founder.
Validation Proceeds at Different Speeds in Different
Channels
It takes far more time to set up visits in a physical channel with prospects in
cellphone companies in Asia and Africa than to get customer feedback
electronically for a website. And more customers can be reached via
web/mobile channels than can ever be met face-to-face.
Make Early Sales to 
Earlyvangelists
In customer validation you will target Earlyvangelists as your first paying
customers. (If you can’t sell to them, it doesn’t get better over time.)
Constrain Spending in Customer Validation
A typical failure scenario for startups is 
premature scaling
, when there are
more salespeople in the field burning cash than are needed while your
business model is still unproven. Or running expensive demand-creation
activities before you’re sure who your customers really are. Too often those
sales people are fired and their marketing programs killed when the startup
faces a major pivot after scaling too early. Customer validation delays sales-
and-marketing hiring and spending until validation is nearly complete. This
constraint is central to the process, which assumes startups will fail and
iterate often. The spending constraint keeps enough cash in the bank to fund
multiple pivots on the road to success.
Prioritize What Needs to be Validated
Prioritizing the business model elements that need validating is essential at
the start of customer validation. Every startup business model has a zillion
moving parts. Validation can’t possibly measure and affirm every variable or
the founders will be 100 years old by the time they’re ready to scale—or,
worse, exit—the business.
The business model canvas is an excellent guide here. Most startups will
focus on the four core elements: value proposition, customer relationships,
channel, and revenue model. This list works for many businesses but not all.
Multi-sided markets need to prioritize all sides of the market. Think about the
five or fewer things that will make this a huge, successful business—or not.
Why Accountants Don’t Run Startups
With all the process steps involved, it’s sometimes hard to remember that the
Customer Development process isn’t a giant focus group. The goal is not to
add up all the customer feedback and vote on what features to implement.
Founders who are artists at heart run startups—the true purpose of Customer
Development is to 
inform their vision.
 (In a new market, there’s no data at
all!) A great entrepreneur may consider all the customer data, listen to his
instincts and say, “Here’s why I’m going to ignore what we just heard.”
The Customer Validation Philosophy, in Summary
Customer discovery first tested your hypotheses about the company’s
business model with a relatively tiny group of customers who were asked for
opinions, not orders. Discovery itself didn’t deliver any proven, hard facts
about who would buy or how scalable the business was.
Customer validation goes to the next step and 
determines whether a
product/market fit can be validated by orders or usage.
 It does so by further
developing the MVP as well as the company’s sales and marketing plans and
materials. Then it gets founders out of the building (physically, virtually, or
both) to test the MVP and every other key business model hypotheses,
including product features, pricing, channel, and positioning. How? By
asking for orders (or downloads, logons, or clicks)!
Test the MVP. How? By asking for orders.
 
Customer validation is complete when the company has answers to these
three questions:
1
. 
Can the business scale?
 Will a dollar spent on customer acquisition
yield more than a dollar’s worth of incremental revenue, page views,
downloads or clicks?
2
. 
Is there a repeatable and scalable sales roadmap?
 Does the company
know the right prospects to call on or acquire, and what to say to them to
consistently deliver sales?
3
. 
Is the sales funnel predictable?
 Do the same sales programs and tactics
consistently deliver an adequate, profitable flow of customers through
the funnel?
Now let’s get started.
Overview of the Customer Validation Process
Customer Validation: Overview of the Process
 (Figure 7.1)
Customer Validation has Four Phases
Phase 1
 consists of six “get ready to sell” activities; product positioning,
sales/ marketing materials for “test selling” efforts, the hiring of a sales
closer, the creation of a distribution channel plan, refining a sales roadmap,
and creating an advisory board. These activities make your team the best
prepared early stage venture ever to hit the streets.
Phase 2
 gets founders out of the building to put the product to the ultimate
test: will customers validate your business model by buying your product?
You’ll attempt to actually sell customers an unfinished and unproven product
without a professional sales organization. Getting feedback is as important as
getting orders. Startups in the physical channel do this with brochures,
PowerPoints, sales materials and, where possible, product demos or mockups.
Dozens if not hundreds of meetings help refine the product presentation and
channel plans, validate the sales roadmap, prove the predictability of the sales
funnel, and validate that the business model is repeatable, scalable and
profitable in a real-world test.
Startups in multi-sided markets (physical or web/mobile) need to get out
of the building to test each side of the market. Web/Mobile marketers first
test users and then validate a different set of hypotheses (value proposition,
segment, revenue model, etc.) with the “payers,” who are marketers or
advertisers willing to pay to reach people using the site for free.
Phase 3
 happens once you have a couple of orders under your belt and
enough customer information to develop and refine your product and
company positioning. The positioning is tested in meetings with industry
pundits and analysts and face-to-face with the expanded customer audience.
Phase 4
 stops all activity for long enough to conduct a detailed pivot-or-
proceed analysis and verify that, regardless of channel, customer validation is
complete and the company knows how to scale. If so, it’s ready to reap the
rewards for founders and investors alike. But first there are lots of tough
questions and hard work to verify.
In sum, the question is simple: “is this a business worth doing,” and
devoting several years of backbreaking work? Will it generate enough
revenue, growth and profits to achieve the founders’ and investors’ goals?
And has the team learned enough to make it happen?
Odds are overwhelming that the optimum business model won’t be
found on the first or second try in validation.
The moment customer validation is over is when it’s clear that there are
real orders, users, or clicks—not surveys or chats. Customer validation
confirms that customers will accept the minimum viable product, proves that
the customers exist, figures out how to reach them predictably, and crafts a
scalable plan to engage and sell many more. It’s often called the “epiphany
moment.”

CHAPTER 8
Customer Validation, Phase One: “Get
Ready to Sell”
P
HASE
 1 
OF CUSTOMER VALIDATION PREPARES
 the tools to test the company’s
ability to acquire customers. In this phase, you’ll craft your product
positioning, which guides how you write the marketing, and online materials
needed for the sales effort. For companies in the physical channel, other steps
in this phase include development of collateral materials, channel sales plans,
and a sales roadmap. Sometimes, a “sales closer” is also hired at this point.
And you’ll finalize your advisory board.
Steps in this first phase are markedly different for each channel, so
physical and web/mobile channels are addressed separately, as outlined in
Figure 8.1
.
When all these steps are in place, it’s time to get out of the building and
start selling, in 
Phase 2
. Here are the steps each channel requires before you
are ready to sell.
Phase 1 – Get Ready to Sell
 (Figure 8.1)
Get Ready to Sell: Craft Positioning Statement
From your customer’s perspective, what does your company stand for, what
does your product do, and why should they care? You probably had an idea
when you started the company, but now you have some real experience in
interacting with customers. It’s time to revisit the product vision, features and
competitive information in light of what you’ve learned in customer
discovery.
Can you reduce all that you’ve learned into a single clear, compelling
message explaining why your company is different and the product is worth
buying (or spending time with). That’s the goal of a unique selling
proposition. A unique selling proposition builds the bond between you and
your customer, focuses marketing programs, and becomes the focal point for
building the company. More relevant for this step, it gets the company’s story
down to a short “elevator pitch” powerful enough to raise a customer’s heart
rate. It’ll appear in lots of different places from billboards to banners and
business cards from here on out and helps focus sales and marketing efforts.
Don’t worry about getting it perfect, because it will change with feedback
from customers, analysts, and investors. For now, take a first best shot.
While positioning messaging seems straightforward, it can be a
challenge to execute. It takes serious work to get to a pithy statement that’s
both understandable and compelling. It’s much easier to write (or think) long
than to write (or think) short. Start by revisiting what customers said they
valued during customer discovery. What were the top problems? Did a phrase
keep coming up to describe the problem or solution? Where does the product
affect customers most? How significant is the product’s impact? What does
the new offering provide that competitors can’t or won’t? What does it do
better? Think simple and short at all times. This may be a place where outside
creative resources are worth the investment.
In technology startups, one of the biggest challenges for engineers is to
realize the need for a simple message that grabs customers’ hearts and
wallets, not their heads and calculators. It’s not about the product features.
Seek a simple sentence that condenses the entire value proposition into a few
pithy, catchy words that say it all: “Think Different,” from Apple; “Don’t
Leave Home Without It,” American Express; “Just Do It,” Nike; “We Try
Harder,” Avis; “Earth’s First Soft Drink,” Perrier; “The Ultimate Driving
Machine,” BMW.
The exercises, in 
Figures 8.2
 and 
8.3
, developed by Geoffrey Moore (of
Crossing the Chasm
 fame) early in his career as a marketing consultant, can
help evoke the necessary elements:
Product Positioning Statement
 (Figure 8.2)
Here’s how a mobile expense-reporting application, 
Mobiledough,
 might
have used the product position statement:
Product Positioning Statement Example
 (Figure 8.3)
What might Mobiledough’s tag line be? A few candidates:
“Your dough, on the go. Fast, accurate, online”
“Track your expenses while you’re makin’ tracks”
“Mobiledough. It just adds up, instantly, online”
Use the Geoff Moore outline or one like it to brainstorm positioning
statements with the Customer Development team. Consider a companywide
contest or creative session. To see if the positioning is emotionally
compelling, think about the following:
Do customers’ heart rates go up after they hear it?
Do they lean forward to hear more? Or do you get a blank stare?
Is it understandable in the users’ language or unique in their minds?
For B-to-B products, does the positioning imply a cost or competitive
advantage for the product?
For consumer products, does it save time or money or provide fun or
love, glamour or status?
Finally, does the positioning pass the reality test? Claims like “lose 30
pounds in a week” or “increase sales 200 percent” or “fall in love tonight”
strain credibility and probably legality as well. Moreover, it’s not only the
claim that needs to pass this test. Is your company a credible supplier for the
product you’re describing? When selling to corporate customers, there are
additional hurdles to think about. Are your capabilities congruent with your
claims?
One last thing to keep in mind is our continual question about what
market type
 you’re in. If you’re offering a product in an existing market, your
unique selling proposition is about better, faster, or higher performance. It’s
framed by what you’ve learned from countless customer interviews about the
basis of competition..
If you’re creating a new market or trying to reframe an existing one,
you’ll probably come up with a transformational unique selling proposition.
Transformational unique selling propositions deal with how the solution will
create a new level or class of activity—i.e., something people could never do
before.
Checklist 27: Craft Company Positioning
Goal
: Create a clear, compelling message explaining why 
your company
 is
different and the product is worth buying
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: “Get Ready to Sell”
  
Message statement
     
  Condenses Value Proposition into single phrase or sentence
     
  Emotionally compelling
     
  Credible
     
  Takes Market Type into account
Exit criteria
:
     
  A short, pithy message that explains what the company stands for, what
the product does and why customers should buy from it, trust it, and
care
Get Ready to Sell: Sales and Marketing Materials
Acquiring customers in the physical channel evolves in a four-stage process:
awareness, consideration, interest, and purchase. To facilitate this sales
process, you’ll use the unique selling proposition you created in the last step
to produce sales and marketing materials—product data sheets, presentations,
a website, etc.—called “marketing collateral.” Your sales team will hand or
present this collateral to potential customers and/or on your website to
communicate the reasons customers should buy.
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Physical Channels
 (Figure 8.4)
In the physical channel, the job of marketing materials is not to close the
sale but to drive prospective customers into the sales funnel, where physical
locations, live salespeople, and supporting selling materials take over and
effect a transaction. 
The material should give people enough information to
raise their curiosity and spark an interaction with sales—but not so much
information that they can decide 
not to buy
 without first interacting with the
channel! Human helpers need a variety of tools to close the deal, and this step
plans and creates a first version of the tool set that helps close the deal.
This section describes online tools, physical sales tools and how to tune
both for your audience.
Much of the information for the materials (product features, benefits,
specs) is found in the hypotheses developed and refined during customer
discovery. Don’t spend money on flashy design or large print runs, but keep
the materials crisp and professional, knowing they’ll change based on
customer feedback.
“Get Customers” Tools for Physical Channels
 (Table 8.1)
Physical Sales Collateral and Materials
Once they arrive in the physical channel, whether they’re driven by the web,
Twitter, or an old-fashioned newspaper ad, the customer eventually gets face-
to-face with a salesperson. When he does, sales materials and tools are often
required. Instead of randomly writing product specs and presentations,
develop a “collateral plan” listing all the items needed at each sales-process
stage (see 
Table 8.2
 for an example). A basic minimum collateral checklist
for almost any company should include the following items:
website
PowerPoint sales presentation
Demos, prototypes and videos
Data sheets
Price lists, contracts and billing systems
Don’t forget the more obvious items: white papers, company press
clippings, customer testimonials, letterhead, presentation folders and business
cards!
Sales Presentations
Sales presentations should deliver an updated, integrated version of the
problem, solution and product presentations developed during customer
discovery, guided by the new positioning. The core audience during customer
validation is earlyvangelists, not mainstream customers. Cover a brief outline
of 
the problem,
 possible 
existing solutions,
 and 
your proposed new solution,
and then product details. The presentation should run no more than 30
minutes. In customer discovery, you may have found that different
presentations were required, depending on the type of people who played a
role in purchase decisions inside a company or with different types of
consumer audiences. Were separate presentations required for senior
management and lower-level employees? How about for a technical
audience? How about for different companies in different industries? For
consumer products, was there a different presentation based on
demographics? Income? Geography?
A worthwhile investment at this stage of Customer Development is
professional help in developing a PowerPoint template. It gives the company
a professional, established appearance even if the office remains a garage or a
basement.
Demos/Prototypes/Video
Most people you’re trying to sell to don’t have your skill in visualizing
products that don’t exist. It’s why you’re the founder and they’re not. For
many people, most product concepts are too hard to understand without some
kind of demo or prototype. Wherever possible, prepare some kind of
prototype, working or not, that illustrates how the product operates and its
key selling points. At a minimum, provide a slide-based, nonworking
illustration or a short video. Ideally, the presentation illustrates the old way
and the new way of solving the problem. It can be made of cardboard or
Styrofoam, or it can be a series of simple sketches, but it should “bring the
product to life” wherever possible. Product development teams in physical-
product startups sometimes confuse demos with working products. They’re
not.
It’s these demos that “turn on the lightbulb” over the heads of many
earlyvangelists and get their passionate about the product.
Data Sheets
It’s easy to confuse product data sheets, which detail product features and
benefits, with solution data sheets, which address customer problems and big-
picture solutions. Which ones you need depend on market type. When
entering an existing market, your focus is on the product and why yours is
better. Here, product data sheets are the best way to illustrate that. However,
if you’re creating a new market or cloning a market, the solution data sheets
are more appropriate. If you’re re-segmenting a market, both types of data
sheets are essential.
Price Lists, Contracts and Billing System
Hopefully by now, someone has asked, “How much does it cost?” Prepare
price lists, quote forms, and contracts. These documents makes a small
startup look like a real 
company. They also force codification of assumptions
about product pricing, configurations, delivery, discounts, and terms.
Consumer products require a way to take early orders, usually involving
credit card processing, e-commerce tools, and more.
Collateral Needs to Be Tuned to the Audience
In validation, startups selling in business-to-business markets have two
different audiences for collateral materials: the earlyvangelist, the technology
gatekeepers and each require different messages and materials (see 
Table
8.2
). Earlyvangelists buy the vision first and then buy the product. Therefore,
make sure materials are clear and detailed enough about vision and benefits
to help earlyvangelists sell the idea by themselves, after the presentation
ends, inside their companies or to friends or family.
Most business-to-business selling situations require a technical overview
with a distinctly deeper level of information for other players in the sales
cycle. Issue-specific white papers can address particular areas of interest or
concern. Develop these as they become necessary but not before. Customers
will tell you what they need. Especially in tight economic climates, business
customers might require a return-on-investment (ROI) white paper. It’s a
customer’s fancy way of saying, “Show me how I financially justify this
purchase. Will it save me money in the long run?” Much of the development
work for this was done as part of the customer discovery process.
Earlyvangelist champions will usually have to pitch the product to others in
their company—often without startup spokespeople present—before
someone agrees to sign the check. For consumers the issue is the same; just
imagine kids trying to make the ROI issue for an iPad. “I won’t have to carry
DVD’s in the car, and promise to read more books if you buy them for me.”
On the other hand, startups selling in business-to-consumer marketers
focus the collateral on materials for the sales channel: shelf-talkers, retail
packaging, coupons, and ad slicks. The collateral plan distinguishes
objectives, targets for, and timing of each piece.
Test-drive all the collateral, because what’s written in the confines of an
office often has little relevance in the field. A/B-test online “collateral” such
as landing pages, checkout pages, and product feature/benefit statements as
ambitiously as possible (more on this in the next section). Consumers and
business buyers have no obligation to memorize the company’s jargon or
understand “inside jokes.” Keep the collateral plan handy. Update and add to
it along the way.
Example of a Business-to-Business, Direct-Sales Collateral Plan
(Table 8.2)
Online Tools for Physical Channel Marketers
Even if the company’s principal channel strategy involves physical
distribution customers still search for products online, you’ll need an array of
basic online tools to generate awareness and trials and to provide product
information on the web. These tools almost always include a website, some
kind of viral marketing program to find customers, and digital forms of
brochures or other selling materials. In addition, social networks have
become huge sources of customers, even for the most mundane physical
goods, and lots of new product ideas surface every day in Twitter streams.
Even the most complicated “old world” products
are promoted through websites and online
marketing.
 
Even the most complicated “old world” products like construction
equipment and materials are promoted through expansive websites and
massive online marketing programs. As a result, marketers in the physical
channel must explore and develop online customer-acquisition and marketing
plans even if their pumps, bushings and gravel are sold only over the counter
in a dingy warehouse. Warehouse or not, today’s buyer will often search for
those products online.
Modern marketing is as much about “pulling” customers to a product as
it is about “pushing” that service at them. For example, an e-mail in your
inbox or a sales rep at your desk is there to push a product at you. Samples at
a Costco display or search engines invite, or pull, you toward the product,
encouraging you to explore it voluntarily because it’s aroused your interest.
Strong marketing campaigns and tools should be blended to do a good job of
both push and pull marketing.
Here are some guidelines to consider in preparing those materials.
Websites
At this stage, websites for companies using the physical channel should
provide clear information on the company’s vision and the problem it was
founded to solve. Your job in this step is to learn how much detailed product
information can pull the customer in to facilitate a sale. At a minimum, the
website’s job is to arouse interest in and spark consideration of the product or
company and to drive interested prospects into the physical sales channel.
(For low-dollar-item products, you can even have the website close the sale.)
However, the website shouldn’t provide customers with reasons 
not to buy
 (it
shouldn’t display details about price, installation requirements, etc). It should
instead encourage interested prospects to interact with the company. Use the
site to collect as much information as the prospect will provide. (Remember,
response rates drop in direct proportion to the number of “required fields” in
a sign-up form.)
Social Marketing Tools
Many companies that sell physical products exclusively in a physical channel
use Facebook pages, Twitter streams, and other social marketing tools to
spread the word and attract customers. They also use these online tools to
invite customers and prospects to introduce products to their colleagues and
friends. Making all this readily available and promoting it ambitiously is a
relatively inexpensive way to accelerate the Get process. (Details about these
tools are found in 
Chapter 3
, and later in this chapter.)
E-mail and e-mailable Marketing Tools
E-mail messages are an important tool for communicating with prospects and
customers online, since they can be targeted and often individualized based
on what you know about them. When crafted carefully to provide useful
information beyond a flat-out sales pitch, they can break through the cluttered
inboxes of even the most cynical prospects. Create e-mail messages and
campaigns that reflect what you know about the individual and design multi-
e-mail campaigns for optimum impact. Create digital versions of brochures,
white papers, and other sales materials to accompany the e-mails themselves.
(Learn more about e-mail campaigns in the 
customer-relationships section
 of
Chapter 3.)
Note to reader: Although tailored to web/mobile startups, the following pages
include tips and guidelines that physical startups will find useful.
Get Ready to Sell: Acquire/Activate Customers
Plan 
(Web/Mobile)
Remember that “Get” activity is very different in web/mobile: you must
attract customers to your site, app, or product or they won’t even know you
exist! Review 
this section
, which, in brief, says: figure out where your
customers go when they’re searching for a solution; be visible and inviting in
as many of those places as possible; and “earn” their visit to your product
with helpful, friendly information, not hard-boiled sales pitches.
“Get Customers” Tools for Web/Mobile Channels
 (Table 8.3)
The “Acquire” Plan and Tools
The Acquire plan is short, to-the-point, and tactical in nature. The plan helps
you find tools that predictably deliver large numbers of “good” customers
(who engage with or spend heavily on the site or app) into the widest point of
the funnel (at the left) at the lowest cost per customer.
The “Get Customers” Funnel in Web/Mobile Channels
 (Figure 8.5)
 
WARNING:
 There is no possible way you can read, process and act on
this section in one read. There’s a lot here. Skim it first, then go back
and read each section. Then think about what action you need to take for
your startup.
 
The Acquire plan (see 
sample plan
) should fit on a single page. It details
the first set of Acquire activities to test and includes:
Who:
 Who’s responsible for driving the program; who will add support
or expertise
What:
 Describe the tactic and its parts (see below for a list of tools)
Budget:
 Estimate of spending for the first round of testing
Timing:
 Outline the steps needed to launch (our example in 
Figure 8.6
uses a four-week cycle)
Why:
 Specific, measurable acquisition goals of each plan element
The acquire plan and tactics will change repeatedly, since in customer
validation they’re basically a series of experiments.
The acquire plan and tactics will change
repeatedly... they’re basically a series of
experiments.
 
In a physical consumer channel like Walmart, marketers seldom know
which consumers see, touch, or buy any particular product. But in the
web/mobile channels, every aspect of consumer behavior can be
instrumented, analyzed and, often as not, optimized to improve business
performance. Be sure your product is instrumented to track every consumer
action or inaction. Without building the instrumentation upfront, optimizing
your acquisition activities is more challenging, if not downright impossible.
A Sample Acquire Spreadsheet
Shown in 
Figure 8.6
 is a sample of part of an Acquire plan for a web startup
with a small budget. The plan is built around a few key assumptions:
     
Who:
 Two staffers are needed, one full-time and one half-time
     
What:
 The tactics, chosen by the team, seem best-suited to maximizing
leads and sales (see next section for a list of tools)
     
Budget:
 The startup has about $25,000 to spend for this
A Sample Acquire Plan and Timetable
 (Figure 8.6)
     
Timing:
 The team is allowing itself four weeks to prepare all elements for
the launch of validation
     
Why:
 The goal is to get 30,000 to 35,000 customers to download a free
trial and to get 15 percent of them to convert to paying customers. This
would achieve a customer acquisition cost of about $5, as suggested in
this plan’s revenue model hypothesis
     
Multi-sided or not?:
 Does your product have both users and payers? If so,
a multi-sided market requires a separate plan for each “side” of its
market. Users will be acquired one way, while reaching and selling
advertisers will demand a totally different approach. (Our sample is a
single-sided market)
Guidelines for Developing the Acquire Plan
Determining whom to acquire (i.e., which customers,) what promotional
tactics to use, and what to say and how to say it (the content and messaging)
is made easy because you did most of the research and planning in customer
discovery. Start this plan by referring back to three hypothesis documents
you devised when you created and tested your original business model canvas
hypotheses:
Customer segments:
 customers to be reached (which guides e-mail,
targeting of marketing activities, ads, and PR)
Customer relationships:
 how customers will be reached (SEO, PPC, e-
mail, PR, etc.)
Value proposition:
 what will excite customers and persuade them to
engage, visit or buy
Don’t be afraid to update or change the hypotheses based on the latest
feedback or even instinct at this point, since they’re still just “best guesses”
confirmed by only a few customers. Other guidelines to keep in mind:
Remember that this is a test
 to figure out which tools work and cost-
effectively when they’re launched during customer creation, the next
step. 
This is not a company or product launch.
 Your goal is learning, 
not
revenue,
 so don’t be afraid to test lots of alternatives
Define success upfront
 for each test, using a pass/fail metric (such as
“one in five people will click”), and monitor results
Be the greatest, friendliest, coolest thing going.
 Your job is to attract or
invite customers to your product, site, or app, so be interesting and
welcoming (and, if appropriate, even fun or funny) rather than not just
offering a hard, cold sale. Think like your customers, and be prominent
and visible where you think they’ll be searching for a solution like
yours. (Think about forums and online communities)
Running tests without collecting data is a cardinal
sin.
 
Instrument everything.
 Running tests without collecting data is a
cardinal sin. Engineering needs to spend the extra effort to collect all
customer behavior data so it can be measured and optimized
continuously. Confront this upfront, as it’s hard to “bolt on” later
Don’t start everything at once,
 since that will create chaos both in the
market and in the company. For example, start search engine
optimization and pay-per-click tests on Day Five, and add e-mail and
affiliate marketing programs two or three weeks later. The individual,
program-by-program results will be easier to identify and measure
Don’t spend more than $2,000 or, if well-funded, $10,000 to test any
one thing.
 The startup usually can’t afford it at this stage, and the risks
of guessing wrong are too great
When a test seems to be working, ramp it up
 to be sure it withstands the
test of scale. If a $2,000 e-mail marketing campaign is performing,
double it, refine it and do it again
Choose agency partners very carefully, if at all.
 The costs and
management time needed to hire a pr, ad, or web agency this early in
your startup make it a very risky proposition. Most often, agencies are
great at execution of programs but not at developing and testing
strategies. Rely on founders and staff where possible, as they know the
product and the business model best. Consider freelance talent
specialized in developing tests and strategies or those who specialize in
specific tasks (e.g., pay-per-click, demos and other specialized skills) if
they don’t exist within the company
Don’t launch the Acquire effort by itself.
 Activation programs must be
ready to “catch” the customers you’ve acquired, so if there’s copy
saying, “Sign up today and get a free box of chocolates,” for example,
the site’s back-end system has to be operating, the chocolates have to be
ready to ship, and copy for the thank-you e-mail must be ready to go. If
you’re taking customers’ money, all back-end systems need to be
working, including such elements as receipts, credit-card processing,
and customer service. Similarly, site and app instrumentation must be up
and running, tested and feeding the management dashboard so it can
measure the behavior of every customer who passes through the funnel.
Remember that acquisition by itself is one of several integrated pieces of
the “Get” strategy (there’s also activation, retention, and “grow
customers,” to name a few).
The acquisition plan is managed through close monitoring of every step
customers take as they move through the sales or “get customers” funnel.
That monitoring, generally in a dashboard, enables constant effort to improve
performance or “throughput”—customers movement from one step to the
next—at every step of the funnel, using tools detailed in the next section,
“optimizing the acquire plan.”
Acquire Plan Tools
Acquisition tools you can buy
The list of customer acquisition tools you can buy and use is virtually
endless, but their customer impact and effectiveness vary over time.
Acquisition is a numbers game based on your ability to cost-effectively
deliver large volumes of customers to your site or app. Basic tools include:
search-engine marketing
e-mail marketing
outreach to bloggers
affiliate marketing
online lead generation
customer incentives
Use the web (and 
www.steveblank.com
) to identify the latest
innovations and to select vendors. Most tools are discussed in detail in
Customer Relationships
.
 
WARNING:
 There is no possible way you can read, process and act on
this section in one read. There’s a lot here. Skim it first, then go back
and read each section. Then think about what action you need to take for
your startup.
 
In the activation step, users decide—all by themselves—whether to
engage with or buy your product, and the decision is often made in a matter
of seconds. So the home or landing page must work hard and fast to activate
newly acquired “lookers,” converting them into buyers, users, or tryers.
(Activation sometimes happens in an app store, via e-mail, through the
channel, or by telephone.) If you can’t get people to activate at once, ideally
you can get them to at least sign up so they can perhaps be persuaded to try,
engage, or buy later.

The landing page is where activation most often begins.
 (Figure 8.7)
Wherever the customer arrives, he or she typically knows little if
anything about where he or she has just landed. Here’s what you need to
address to activate a customer, using an oversimplified example of what goes
through the visitor’s mind on arrival:
Why
 am I here? They want me to buy this new online multiplayer game
What
 makes it special? Oh, here’s a feature list and reasons to buy
How
 do I know it’s any good? Here’s a demo, list of endorsements, user
quotes, etc.
Where
 do I get more information? I see buttons pointing to free trials,
more info, etc.
Next?
 What does the company want me to do? Oh, click here to try/
buy/sign up
Guidelines for Developing the “Activate” Plan
In the customer validation phase, the activation plan is really a test plan, A/B-
testing every key aspect of the home/landing page, from color and copy to
offers and navigation. It’s OK to start with approximations or guesses, but
they should iterate rapidly based on measured customer responses.
Should a landing-page offer scream “free” or subtly ask for a credit
card? Should the “buy now” button be elegant and on top or bright orange
and huge in the lower right-hand corner? Does an animated product demo
activate more users than a simple graphic? There are scores if not hundreds of
variables on almost any home page, and many tests must be repeated more
than once to confirm results. Outside information architects and design
professionals can help. They understand the range of tools available as well
as the latest tricks of the trade in this highly creative process.
The list of tools, tricks, and variables to try is nearly endless, and it’s
hard to predict which ones will win. That’s why repeated testing and
measurement are so important, following the “test, measure, tweak” approach
discussed earlier.
Here’s what an activation plan should include:
Two types of action steps:
 Activation happens both on and off the home
page, so create two separate lists of the “Get” customers activities you
plan to test (like offering a premium with every signup)
First/second test:
 This is customer discovery, where you’re running
small-scale tests of your activation programs. Each of those programs
needs to be tested at least twice, if not far more frequently, as you try to
find the program that’ll generate the most users or customers. Identify at
least the first two tests
Pass/fail test:
 Every test should have a “pass/fail,” or an expectation that
defines what “success” will look like if you have it. Based on
experience, trials, or research, identify the metric that’ll determine if the
experiment was a success
An “Activate” Plan Example
Most activation happens on the home or landing page, where you’re doing
anything you can to get a user or customer you’ve acquired (he or she came
to your page) and trying to engage them—get them to click, sign up, post a
comment, play, or buy.
The home page is “where the action is” for
activation.
 
And while the home page is “where the action is” for activation, there
are other things you can also do—like send follow-up e-mails, for example—
to further engage someone who’s expressed more than a passing interest.
Table 8.4
 is a simplified example of what an activation plan might look
like for a social network where new golfers can offer and solicit improvement
tips. In this example, since the business is in a multi-sided market, activation
goals include such non-monetary actions as registration, inviting friends,
asking a question or answering one.
Sample Activation Plan for a Golfers’ Social Network
 (Table 8.4)
Tools for the Activate plan
Activation happens both on and off the home page. Key tools to consider for
each are in the bullet points that follow.
On the home or landing page
The landing page itself offers lots of ways to drive activations, including
content, look and feel, and navigation. It can also showcase these activation
tools:
product demos
free trials
customer contact tools
animation
Non-home page acquisition tools
While the home page is the primary activation tool, consider these others too:
e-mail cascades
price/incentives
traditional tools
On the home or landing page itself:
Start with Content, Look and Feel, Functionality
and Navigation
Good landing pages bear little resemblance to online brochures. They’re
invitations to “activate now,” working hard to invite customers to engage or
interact with—or buy—the product. This must happen literally at once, often
in seconds. Otherwise the customer (and the money spent to acquire him or
her in the previous step) vanishes with the click of a mouse. Develop the
home/landing page along four axes:
1
. 
Content:
 Does the site present everything for a customer needs to make
the “activation” decision simply, in multiple places (for example, does
every page say “join now”)? Is it friendly, informative, and inviting?
2
. 
Look and feel:
 Does the appearance relate to the audience (“corporate”
for business apps, “serious” for financial sites, “edgy” for 
teen or
skateboarding products)? Does it match the typical style of the
demographic or their country?
3
. 
Functionality:
 What tools, widgets, configurators, demos or other
devices can quickly engage customers, get them experimenting with and
experiencing the product itself, and figuring out what it costs, how much
time it would save, or how the game plays?
4
. 
Navigation/structure:
 How is information organized? How accessible is
it? How easy is it for users to complete high-value tasks (ordering,
searching, etc.)?
Here’s how to approach each area.
Home/Landing Page Content:
     •   
Tell me how I got here!
 Users arrive at the home/landing page in a
variety of ways (clicks, e-mails, referrals), but don’t assume they
know where they’ve landed. Welcome them; explain the site
(“Welcome to the No. 1 online gaming portal.”) to avoid fast
abandonment
     •   
Reinforce the “scent” of
 the e-mail, ad, or tool that drove the customer
to the page. Use similar verbiage (and look and feel) to increase
confidence that the viewer has come to the right place
     •   
Issue a clear call to action.
 The “pitch,” or call to action, tells the
customer what you want him or her to do. It should reflect 
positioning
developed in Stage 1 of validation, whether it’s “buy now,” “sign up,”
or “attend a seminar.” Use redundant calls to action wherever you
can, but be sure they’re not confusing. Clearly tell visitors what to do
and why doing so delivers value to 
them.
 The landing page should
always accomplish the following:
          
   Explain what problem the product solves and why it’s important to
users and worthy of their attention
          
   Communicate ease of use and installation for the product
          
   Clearly explain how the product works
          
   Provide fast proof that it works (user quotes, competitive analysis,
demos, etc.)
Calls to action
 appear three ways on a home/landing page: hyperlinks,
buttons, and forms. They should stand out and be obvious to every visitor.
Highlight product features that make the most powerful pitch for activation or
purchase, and always provide easy access to more information about all the
above.
Some guidelines for home or landing page content development:
Encourage me to “experience the offer:” Never
 think of the landing
page as a brochure. It’s effective only if it encourages customer
engagement, trial, or purchase. All content should invite involvement,
and offers should be judiciously sprinkled throughout headlines,
graphics and text, including “try now” textlinks embedded at least
occasionally in body copy
Offer multiple calls to action
 ranging from “buy now” and “learn more”
to “download our white paper” and “talk to someone.” Remember to
make one of these far more prominent than all the others—the action
most desired by the company
Write short!
 Web visitors are very fragile, temporary guests. Respect
their short attention spans and get to the point before they depart. The
best calls to action are generally written in 10 or fewer words and
displayed in an easily readable font
Be specific.
 One of the most powerful page elements should be the core
product-positioning statement developed in Step 1 of customer
validation. Succinctly tell users why they should buy or use what the
company’s selling
Use bold graphics
 such as snipes or bursts on the landing page to
promote a mobile site.
Deploy contests, promos and sweepstakes
 to encourage mobile
downloads. These are highly valuable in the online space—both for
users, who can redeem such offers immediately, and for startups, which
can test and adjust offers on the fly
Manage your content inventory.
 Content should build credibility for the
company, presenting it as solid, established, and ready to do business.
Information on most of the following should be accessible from the landing
page:
product detail and information about the solution
customer lists and success stories
customer resources and support
vendor partners
company background
current news and events
company contact information (postal, phone, and e-mail)
the company’s privacy policy
Look and Feel
Design the home or landing page for maximum impact and minimal
confusion. Always provide the user with multiple pathways to the desired
“activation” action, whether it’s subscribing, posting, playing or buying.
Strive for fewer, crisper design elements, not more, keeping national cultural
differences in mind when designing. (The advice below is for the U.S., where
users expect websites to look clean and simple.) In some other countries,
including China, users expect more design elements, which may look
cluttered to a Western eye.
Keep it clean and simple,
 without too many distractions from the call to
action
Pick one promotional message and drive it the hardest
 at the expense of
others. Make it more prominent, supported by other things on the page,
and compelling, along the lines of “free trial download” or “special
introductory pricing this month”
Leave plenty of white space.
 Crowded pages are clearly a turnoff. An
overbearing number of graphic elements (art, type, buttons, etc.) will
frustrate and distract users
Use visuals.
 Whether using graphics, videos, demos, or diagrams, don’t
rely on copy itself to maintain user interest. Web visitors have extremely
short attention spans. Keep the diagrams, charts and graphics simple.
Use animation carefully to add interest
Use interactivity.
 The web allows customer interaction with the brand,
something no other medium allows. (If these kinds of tools aren’t on the
site, you’re not using the web to its fullest potential)
Use big buttons.
 “Download” or “buy now” or “sign up” should be
graphically interesting, sizable and easy to spot
Navigation and Functionality
Navigation is really about two things: the logical organization of information
and the shortest routes to task completion.
“Friendly” navigation provides users several “routes” to the call to
action. Routes might take a user to a demo, to customer testimonials, to a
white paper, or to a list of product features. Since nobody can predict what a
customer wants to do next, each pathway should easily lead to “buy now” or
another call to action.
Confusing navigation is the “foe,” offering too many choices, confusing
buttons, textlinks and a hodgepodge of options a user might choose. This
often leads to higher abandon rates.
Overall Website Functionality:
     •   
Use tools to invite customer engagement.
 Video, animation, demos,
configurators and other devices should provide customers multiple
ways to engage with the product itself, any way they’d like. “Take a
tour (of our product)” and “play now” and “forecast your retirement
needs” are typical engagement invitations, and each is far more
powerful than offers like “read more” or “learn about...” Some
examples:
          1. “Enter your age/answer three questions to learn how little this
insurance costs”
          2. “Click here to see Facebook friends’ photos on our site”
          3. “Pick your character and start talking to him now”
          4. “Find young single women in your neighborhood right now”
          5. “What’s your favorite golf ball? Click here for deep discounts. Free
shipping!”
     •   
Use a demo
 to engage users with the product and show off its features
and ease of use. Make the demo more compelling (and under a minute
long) than a PowerPoint. When possible, draw users into an actual,
functioning component of the product (“put your data here” or “play
this brief version.”). The demo should end at the call to action
Engage users with the product and show off its
features.
 
     •   
Offer free trials.
 Not to be confused with a 
freemium
 pricing strategy, a
free trial offer can be restricted by limiting the free version’s
functionality or duration (as in “try it free for two weeks”). Follow up
with a series of e-mails that introduce features, offer tips, and provide
reasons to buy. Where it makes sense financially, follow up with
telesales
     •   
Click to contact.
 Particularly for commerce and paid subscription sites
(and probably too costly for freemium or multi-sided startups), offer
several ways for prospects to contact the company. This can be as
simple as a clickable link that spawns an e-mail to the sales
department or a form for requesting more information or a call from
Sales. Many commerce sites use real-time live voice and chat
technology to engage quickly with prospects and enhance the chances
of activation
     •   
Use animation.
 Interactive configurators, calculators, animated demos,
microsites, and many other utilities can bring the product to life and
engage the customer. These can be developed inexpensively by
outside sources found online. Some websites launch brief welcome
videos or quiet, animated demos that load automatically when a user
gets to the site, but only play on demand (so it doesn’t annoy the
visitor or drive her away). Use animation sparingly, as it can be
jarring
     •   
Incorporate source-driven pages:
 Create multiple landing pages and
match each one to the source of the click that brought users to the
page. “Welcome, Yahoo friends” would almost certainly increase the
visitor’s comfort and click-through rate, as would a “special offer for
Yahoo e-mail customers” that, oddly enough, is the same offer
presented to Gmail customers or on a slightly different landing page
An entire industry has emerged around tools to
encourage customers to take action.

 
An entire industry has emerged around tools to encourage customers to
take action while at a company’s website. New home-page tools are
developed regularly, and some grow in popularity while others fade. This is
an area where a modest amount of time spent on online research about the
latest tools can pay off. In addition, freelance or small-agency experts in
activation tests might be helpful (just remember that you don’t want to run
major programs yet, just experiments). Check 
www.steveblank.com
 for the
latest tools.
Get Ready to Sell: Hire a Sales Closer
In most startups, the founding team is typically product-oriented and rarely
includes a sales professional. While founders often do just fine at finding
earlyvangelist customers by themselves, they often lack the skill or
experience to turn those relationships into orders. As sales efforts get under
way, it’s time to honestly determine whether someone on the founding team
has the necessary experience to close deals. Does the team know how to
negotiate with a buyer or a purchasing manager? Negotiate deal terms with a
CFO? Are the founders willing to bet the company on their ability to close
the first sales? If not, it’s time to hire a sales closer.
A sales closer is not a sales VP who wants to rush out to build and
manage a large sales organization. Good sales closers are aggressive, love
early markets, want great compensation for success, and have no interest in
building a sales organization. Typically, closers are experienced startup
salespeople noted not just for their rolodexes in the target market but also for
fabulous listening, pattern-recognition and collaboration skills. They also
love finding new markets and closing deals and aren’t ready to retire behind a
desk.
While the closer will be an integral part of customer validation, the
founders and the CEO still need to actively lead the process. Together, the
founders and the sales closer are the core of the Customer Development team.
It’s their job to learn and discover enough information to build the sales and
channel roadmaps. Going once around the customer validation loop without a
sales closer may make sense unless it holds back progress. At that point, hire
the closer. 
A closer is invaluable in setting up meetings, pushing for follow-
up meetings, and closing the deal. Having a sales closer is in no way a
substitute for getting founders personally out and in front of customers
.
Checklist 29: Get Ready To Sell: Hire A Sales
Closer
Goal
: Identify someone with the necessary skills and experience to close
deals
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
     
  Experienced startup salesperson
     
  Good contacts in the target market
     
  Stellar listening, pattern recognition and collaboration skills
     
  Understand difference: closer vs. VP of sales
     
  Does not replace founders getting out in front of customers personally
Exit criteria
:
     
  Experienced sales closer is hired
Get Ready to Sell: Sales Channel Roadmap
This sales channel roadmap section assumes that, in Customer Discovery,
your team evaluated the distribution channel alternatives and is focused on
one specific sales channel. Get one channel right first, then expand later.
Rather than spreading yourself thin, focus on one
channel first.
 
What if you’re not sure this is the right channel? It’s OK, this is just a
test. Rather than spreading yourself thin, testing multiple distribution
channels at once, focus on one channel first, whether it’s direct sales, chain
stores, or mail order. Based on test results, other channels are easily added
later. The one exception to this rule: companies using their own website to
sell directly to end-users should also test that in parallel.
Elements of a sales channel roadmap are:
channel “food chain”
channel responsibility
channel discount and financials
channel management
Sales Channel “Food Chain”
For a distribution channel, the food chain is the link of organizations between
you and your customer (from your vp of sales to a sales rep to a distributor to
a retailer, 
for example). The food chain describes each of the organizations in
the chain, and its relationships with the company and with one another.
Here, for example, is the food chain showing how books move from a
publisher to a book-buying customer at an e-book publishing company. The
food chain diagram might look as simple as 
Figure 8.8
 below.
Direct ebook Publishing Food Chain
 (Figure 8.8)
However, selling through the traditional physical distribution food chain
for printed books, it’s far more complex, as shown in 
Figure 8.10
.
Book Publishing Physical Channel Food Chain
 (Figure 8.9)
To get ready to sell, create a visual representation of your channel food
chain. It may include these or other “links” in the chain:
National wholesalers:
 Stock, pick, pack, ship and collect, and then pay
the publisher for orders received. They fulfill orders but don’t create
demand
Distributors:
 Use their own sales force to sell to bookstore chains and
independents. The distributor makes the sale; the bookstore actually
orders from the national wholesaler
Retailers:
 This is where the customer sees and can buy books
Review the 
channel hypothesis
 to see what needs to be included in your
diagram.
Channel Responsibility
A channel-responsibility map diagrams the relationships in a complex
distribution channel. A written description of these responsibilities, created in
describing the “food chain,” should accompany the diagram. It helps
everyone on the team understand why the channel was selected and what to
expect from it.
One of the mistakes startups often make is assuming their channel
partners invest in creating customer demand. Most do not. For example, in
Figure 8.10
, don’t assume the book wholesaler does anything other than stock
and ship books. The same is true for the distributor. It takes orders from
bookstores and in some cases may promote book sales to bookstores, but it
doesn’t bring customers into the store to buy. (Unfortunately nowadays most
publishers don’t create demand either.)
Channel Responsibility Map
 (Figure 8.10)
Channel Discounts and Financials
Each tier in the “food chain” costs the company money, since each tier
charges for its services. In most channels, these fees are calculated as a
percentage of the “list” or retail price consumers pay. To understand how the
money flows from the customer to company, first calculate the discounts
each channel tier requires. 
Continuing with our book-publishing example, we
can construct a diagram, as shown in 
Figure 8.11
, detailing the discount each
tier requires.
Channel Discounts
 (Figure 8.11)
As you can see, a book retailing for $20 would net our publishing
company $7 after everyone in the channel took his cut. From this $7, the
publisher must pay the author a royalty, market the book, pay for the printing
and binding, contribute to overhead, and realize a profit. Out of the $20 a
customer pays, there’s only a dollar or two for the author! No wonder authors
are ditching print and going directly to e-books.
Channel discounts are only the first step in examining how money flows
in a complex distribution channel. For example, in the book channel and
many others (software, media, more), sales are on a 
consignment
 basis with
100 percent return rights. This means your product (the unsold books in the
example) can be returned to your company for full credit (and to add insult to
injury, you have to pay the return freight for returned products). Why is this a
problem? A mistake that startups frequently make when they use a
distribution channel is to record the sale to the channel (in this case the
national wholesaler) as revenue. The sad truth is that orders from a channel
partner don’t mean that end customers bought the product; it only means they
hope and believe they will.
In addition, some channels have a stock rotation-returns policy (outdated
food, old versions of software or hardware) requiring allowances for a
proportion (or all) of your “sold” products to be returned.
Your channel financial plan should include a description of all the
financial relationships among tiers of the channel (see 
Figure 8.12
).
Channel Financial Relationships
 (Figure 8.12)
Channel Management
Although every company’s goal is a well-managed and carefully selected
sales channel, failure to select the right channel or to control the channel
often results in miserable sales revenue and unanticipated channel costs.
Much like instrumenting a website, you need to monitor your channel
inventory levels, sell in and sell through. In a direct-sales channel, it’s
straightforward: no goods leave your company until there’s a customer order.
In an indirect channel, however, the biggest risk is knowing how much end-
user demand actually exists. Why? Your company has a direct relationship
only with the tier of distribution closest to it. You’re dependent on channel-
partner reports, which are often months out of date, to learn how much
product has “sold through” the channel or how much has actually been
purchased. Another risk is the temptation in an indirect channel to “stuff” the
channel. 
Stuffing
 means getting a tier of the channel to accept more product
on consignment than sales forecasts reasonably expect the channel to sell.
This tactic can provide a temporary but imaginary inflation of sales, followed
by a debacle (or in the case of public companies, lawsuits) later. All these
potential issues need to be documented and discussed in the channel-
management plan in order to avoid surprises later.
Multi-Sided Markets
Multi-sided markets are more common in the web/mobile channels but exist
in the physical channel as well. Medical devices are a good example of a
“physical” channel with a complex multi-sided market. An artificial hip may
be approved by the FDA, recommend by a doctor, implanted inside a patient,
bought by a hospital, installed by a surgeon but paid for by an insurance
company. (See 
Figure 8.13
 below.) In this case, just focusing on patients or
doctors or hospitals without understanding who the payers are and how they
reimburse for hip implants would be a fatal error. Startups in multi-sided
markets need to validate 
all sides
 of their channel hypothesis.
Channel Diagram for a Complex Multi-Sided Market
 (Figure 8.13)
Checklist 30: Sales Action Channel Plan
Goal:
 Develop a preliminary Sales Channel Action Plan to test the channel
hypothesis developed in Customer Discovery.
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
  
Refined distribution channel plan
  
“Food chain” drawing
     
  All organizations between company and end-user customers identified
     
  Each organization and its relationships with the company and with one
another identified
  
Channel Responsibility Map
     
  Relationships in the Company’s distribution channel diagrammed
     
  Written descriptions of all responsibilities
  
Financial relationships between channel tiers mapped out
  
Channel management plan devised
  
Process identified for monitoring channel management plan
Exit criteria
: Preliminary sales action plan that
     
  Describes the channel “food chain” and attendant responsibilities
     
  Figures out the costs associated with each tier of the channel
     
  Addresses management of the sales channel
  
Pass/Fail tests identified as appropriate
Get Ready to Sell: Develop the Sales Roadmap
A classic startup flaw is hiring a sales force before you’ve figured out how to
sell. At the start, a fog of uncertainty hangs over you. It’s the founders’ job to
gather enough information to illuminate how to proceed one step at a time,
and then assemble that information into a coherent picture of the right path to
take. We call this the “sales roadmap.”
Your goal is to determine who your true customers are and how they’ll
buy your product. You build a sales team only when you completely
understand the process that transforms a prospect into a purchaser and know
you can sell the product at a price that supports your business model. With
the sales roadmap in their hands, the members of your sales force will be able
to focus on actual sales instead of the hit-and-miss experimentation you’ll
undertake as you move through the customer validation process.
With the sales roadmap in their hands, the
members of your sales force will be able to focus on
actual sales.
 
A sales roadmap details every step from the first call to a prospective
buyer to the contract signing. It should also show how those steps vary from
one company, buyer or job title to the next. The initial sales-road-map
hypothesis developed in customer discovery should be updated based on
customer feedback and revisited before sales calls begin. Don’t worry—it
will change further based on field experience with customers.
The roadmap’s complexity depends on the customer’s size, buying cycle
and budget as well as the product’s price, the industry, and the distribution
channel 
selected. The roadmap for selling the CEO of a midsize company is
clearer, say, than the route to selling a Fortune 500 VP. And roadmaps to
Safeway, Intel or Toys “R” Us are far tougher than those leading to local
florists or pet stores. Good roadmaps are hard work, but they’re the
difference between success and failure. Refine the roadmap while the
company is lean and small, before dozens of sales reps find themselves lost
on the road, selling without a map.
Three other key sales-planning tools support the sales roadmap:
company organization and influence maps, and customer access maps.
Organization and Influence Maps
Remember those organization and influence map briefs you created in the
customer discovery step? It’s time to pull them off the wall and study your
findings. By now your early hypotheses have been modified to reflect the
reality you encountered as you spoke with potential customers. Use this
information to develop a working model of the purchase process for your
target customer. You’ll also want to take a closer look at the notes from your
encounters with possible earlyvangelists. You might also want to bring in
customer information from other sources such as a company’s annual report,
Hoovers, Dun & Bradstreet or press articles.
The E.piphany sales cycle is a good example of how the influence map
for a complex sale can be developed. Given the six-to seven-figure cost of
E.piphany’s software, buyers had to feel a significant pain, recognize it as a
pain, and be committed to making the pain go away for E.piphany to get a
sale. The product also required “top down” selling to senior executives first
who would use their authority to mandate agreement/acquiescence from their
staffs. In a large enterprise the alternative is working “bottom to top,” up
from low level employees, with each trying to convince the boss, a much
more difficult process for costly systems. Further, E.piphany changed the
status quo inside companies. It required several organizations to reconfigure
their business processes and job specs. While an improvement for the
company, change engenders resistance, and resistance creates saboteurs—
always an unwelcome surprise.
The bad news: multiple “yes” votes were required to get an E.piphany
order. Other enterprise sales, such as manufacturing-process controls or
customer support, sometimes need endorsement from only one key executive
or user community to close a deal. With those packages, Information
Technology executives personnel 
generally had input into selection, but the
actual users enjoyed substantial power in the decision. An E.piphany sale was
different, since IT wasn’t the driver, but it 
was
 an active participant—often
with veto power. Likewise, experience showed it was necessary to sell both
“high” and “wide” on the user and technical sides of an account. After getting
thrown out of multiple accounts, we built a simple two-by-two matrix that
shows where support and approval were needed:
Support/Approval Matrix
 (Figure 8.14)
This matrix said that even with a visionary executive in an operating
division supporting the E.piphany purchase, it was necessary to sell to four
constituencies to close a deal. Without support in an operating division of the
company and IT/tech “approval,” we couldn’t close a deal. Early on, it
became apparent that if the IT organization was determined to derail an
E.piphany sale, it would often succeed. This insight was a big deal. It was
one of the many “aha’s” that made Epiphany successful. We figured out how
to solve the problem because a founder and the sales closer were present to
witness the initial sales strategy failure, and spent time figuring out how to
pivot the sales strategy.
Early sales efforts fell short because they ignored the fact that selling
E.piphany into the enterprise was different from the sale of other enterprise
products. The most glaring oversight was failure to enlist the support of the
IT organization. In sales calls, it was easier to get people on the operational
side excited than it was to excite IT about a suite of applications to serve
sales, service or marketing. In some cases, E.piphany took the excited
prospects in operating divisions at their word when they said they could make
CIO and the IT department “fall into line” and approve the purchase. In other
cases, necessary steps were skipped and it was assumed that several
enthusiastic users could do our deal. Rarely did this prove true.
Example of an Influence Map
 (Figure 8.15)
We assembled that sales failure and success data into an “influence
map.” We had already established that a) we needed the support of four
groups to get a deal done, b) IT would often be harder to win over than users
and c) low-level IT personnel would oppose the concept. The critical
question became “How to proceed?” The influence map, as shown in 
Figure
8.16
, delineates the players and the order in which they need to be convinced
and sold. Each step leveraged strengths from the step before, using
momentum created by groups that liked the company and the products to
overcome objections from groups that didn’t. More often than not,
shortcutting the process or skipping a sales stage meant losing the sale.
When understood, the Influence Map set the execution strategy for sales.
Call on: (1) high-level operating executives (VPs, divisional GM’s, etc.) first.
Then, use that relationship as an introduction to (2) high-level technical
executives (CIO or divisional IT exec), then (3) meet the operational
organizations’ end users (the people who will use the product), and finally,
(4) use that groundswell of support to present to, educate, and eliminate
objections from the corporate or divisional IT staff.
Customer Access Map
With the influences understood and written down, turn your attention to
answering the perennial sales question of how to get the proverbial foot in the
door. For corporate sales, purchasing or procurement is about the worst
possible place to start, particularly when offering disruptive innovation.
Varying with the prospect’s size, corporate sales often require agile
maneuvering through different layers or departments to set up meetings with
the people identified in the organization and influence maps. Sales calls to
actual customers help fill in blanks in the access map, adding information and
suggesting behavior patterns. 
Figure 8.16
 illustrates an access map in a
corporate account.
For consumers, finding the right entry to early customers can be equally
difficult. Rather than making random calls, think of organizations and
special-interest groups that can be reached inexpensively. Can you reach
customers through organizations they belong to, such as the PTA, book clubs,
or antique car clubs? Are there web-based groups or meetups that might be
interested?
Example of an Access Map
 (Figure 8.16)
Sales Strategy
Understanding the influence map is step one in finding a repeatable sales
process.
Lay out your corporate/consumer organization map, influence map and
your access map side by side. For a corporate sale, your challenge is to move
beyond the names and titles of the people you’ll call on to develop a strategy
for approaching them. As you begin to develop a sales strategy, here are
some questions to consider:
At what level do you enter the account? For example, do you sell high to
executives? Or low to the operational staff?
How many people on the organizational map need to say yes for a sale?
In what order do you need to call on these people? What’s the script for
each?
What step can derail the entire sale? Who are the potential saboteur?
Similarly, if you were trying to reach twentysomethings with a new
consumer product, the questions might be:
Do you need to get access to a specific demographic segment? For
example, do you sell to college students? Parents? Families?
How many people need to say, Is this an individual sale or family
decision?
If this sale requires that multiple members of a family or group agree, in
what order do you need to call on these people? What’s the script for
each?
What step can derail the entire sale?
Again, as you move out into the marketplace to sell your product, you’ll
learn what works or not. As predictable patterns emerge, your strategy will
become clear.
Implementation Plan
A common first time founder mistake is getting a “thumbs up” from an
earlyevangelist and opening the Champagne to toast the first sale. As any of
you with experience in sales will know, don’t do it yet. Unfortunately, much
can happen between the time the decision-maker agrees to make a purchase
and you actually receive the check. The goal of the implementation plan is to
write down all the things left to happen before the sale is finalized and the
product delivered and to determine who will follow up to manage them. For
example:
Does the CFO or the CEO or both need to approve the sale?
Does the board need to approve the sale?
Does Mom or Dad need to approve the sale?
Does the customer need to get a loan to finance the sale?
Must other vendors systems/components be installed and working first?
Checklist 31: Develop/Refine The Sales Roadmap
Goal:
 Who are the company’s customers and how will they purchase your
product?
Reference:
 Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
     
  Sales roadmap developed
     
  Organization and influence maps refined
     
  Customer Access Map refined
     
  Sales strategy developed
     
  Implementation plan devised
     
  Team members identified to manage each facet of the plan
Exit criteria
:
     
  A thorough plan for getting a foot in the door, making the sale, and
seeing it through
Get Ready to Sell: Formalize the Advisory Board
Hopefully, you’ve asked for help from advisers on an informal basis in
customer discovery. In this phase, it’s time to formally engage them. There
are no hard and fast rules for how large an advisory board should be or
whether it should be a “board” at all. Basically, you want two things from
advisors: great introductions you can’t get any other way to key customers,
talent or investors; and bold, out-of-the-box business model design thinking
that will have dramatic impact on your strategy. All the rest is window
dressing.
Think strategically, not tactically, about advisors’ reach and sphere of
influence. Recruit only advisors who will make a serious impact on the
company in one way or another—think quality, not quantity. (If you’re
raising money having a cloud of “impressive names” may help, but don’t
confuse them with these people.) Formal advisory board meetings aren’t
required, at least for now, but this process should deliver access to experts
who can help.
Begin by assembling an advisory board road map, much like the
collateral roadmap developed earlier. As shown in 
Table 8.5
, the roadmap is
an organized list of the key advisors needed. (Don’t feel compelled to put
advisors in every box on the chart.)
In this example, the roadmap differentiates how each advisor will be
used (technical, business, customer, industry or marketing). Usually, the most
important advisors your startup can have are the ones with “golden
rolodexes” who can make high-level introductions to early customers,
channel partners, or partners who can deliver significant web traffic. Product
Development may need technical advisors as early as Phase 1 of customer
discovery. The technical advisory board is staffed with advisors from
academia or industry who can offer technical advice and pointers to technical
talent. As the company begins to sell product, these advisors are used as
technical references for customers.
Where possible, particularly in enterprise sales situations, put key
potential customers on the customer advisory board. These are people met in
customer discovery who can advise about the product from the customer’s
perspective. I always tell these advisors, “I want you on my advisory board so
I can learn how to build a product you’ll buy. We both fail if I can’t.” They’ll
serve as a customer conscience for the product, and later some will be great
references for, or introducers to, other customers. Use them for insight and
one-on-one meetings with the company’s business and Customer
Development staff—and don’t be afraid to ask them for specific
introductions.

Advisory Board Roles
 (Table 8.5)
Two other sets of advisors to consider: an industry advisory board of
domain experts who bring credibility to the company’s specific market or
technology; and an advisor to the CEO who’s a “been there, done that” CEO
type who can bring practical, how-to advice.
Make sure that, for people that count to you, you
count to them.
 
The number of advisors for each domain will obviously vary with
circumstances, but there are some rules of thumb. Both sales and marketing
advisors tend to have large egos. You can usually only manage only one of
them at a time. Industry advisors like to think of themselves as 
the
 pundits for
particular industries. Have them give you their opinions without being in the
same room or showing up on the same day—this allows you to sort through
whose advice you want to follow. Business advisors are much like marketing
advisors, but some have expertise in different stages of the company.
Consider keeping a few on hand to make you smarter. Finally, our product
development team could never get enough of the technical advisors. They’d
come in and make us smarter about specific technical issues. The same was
true for the customer advisors. Be sure to learn something new every time
they come by.
Compensating Advisors
The Oracle of Omaha, Warren Buffet, says it best: “Make sure that, for
people that count to you, you count to them.” That about sums it up. Advisers
typically receive common stock without precise correlation to the hours
they’ll give your company or exactly what they’ll do to help. The stock
typically vests over time, in monthly increments, so it’s easily adjusted based
on the adviser’s value to the company.
The best advisors of all 
pay you
 to become advisors.
They often make a modest cash investment.

 
The best advisors of all 
pay you
 to become advisors. They often make a
modest cash investment of, say, $20,000 or $100,000 for some of the
company’s preferred stock, and their investment is “boosted” with a generous
allocation of common shares that pay for the advisory services. Sophisticated
investors recognize the importance of advisors’ willingness to not only lend
their names but also invest some personal cash in what they clearly believe is
a significant opportunity.
Checklist 32: Formalize Advisory Board
Goal:
 Formally engage advisors who can facilitate high-level introductions
and are top-notch “out of the box” thinkers
Reference
: Chapter 8, Customer Validation Phase 1: Get Ready to Sell
  
Advisory board roadmap assembled
     
  Size – quality vs. quantity
     
  Ability to make high-level introductions
     
  Technical expertise
     
  Meetings or no meetings?
     
  Key potential customers
     
  Domain experts
     
  A seasoned CEO type
     
  Decide about compensation
Exit criteria
:
     
  Formal depiction of the size, makeup and operation of the company’s
advisory board(s)

CHAPTER 9
Customer Validation, Phase Two: Get Out
of the Building and Sell!
I
N THIS PHASE OF CUSTOMER VALIDATION
, it’s time to try to sell. Customer
discovery had you get out of the building twice, first to understand
customers’ problems and how they work and second to determine how well
the new product solves that problem. And while you’ve no doubt conducted
hundreds of tests to iterate and pivot your business model, there is no better
“pass/fail” test than asking a customer to give you an order or spend time
with your app or website.
In a physical channel, nothing validates a hypothesis better than a signed
order, especially when it’s signed before the product is either complete or
actually shipping. In the web/mobile channel, the equivalent validation is
attracting users or payers at the rate your hypotheses said you would. (In a
multi-sided market, even if you’re getting great traffic and growth, be sure
the “other” side, usually the advertisers or payers, are eager to spend to reach
your traffic.)
Your job in this phase is not to scale a revenue plan but to validate your
business model hypotheses with pass/fail tests that feel an awful lot like
selling or building web traffic. But revenue or traffic at full scale doesn’t
happen until the next step, customer creation. Customer validation is the 
test
sales process that—while it makes real sales—is principally aimed at
answering a long list of questions, including:
Are customers enthusiastic about the product’s value proposition?
Does the company understand its customer segments and their needs?
Do customers truly value the product features? Are any key features
missing?
Is the product pricing right, and can the product be sold at a reasonable
cost?
What’s the purchasing and approval process inside a customer’s
company?
Are the sales roadmap and channel strategy valid for scaling the sales
team?
Are there enough customers to make this a real business?
“Get out of the building” means one thing for companies with physical
goods or those primarily using the physical channel, and it means something
radically different for companies in the web/mobile channels. 
Figure 9.1
shows the differences..
In customer validation, the testing process is a series of elegantly simple
pass/fail tests where the answer is binary, and never “it feels good” or “they
like it.” Some examples:
If your physical channel business model says...
you will close two sales for every 10 sales calls, do you?
an average customer will buy six widgets in three months, do they?
$5,000 at spent at a tradeshow (or in direct mail) will generate 25 leads,
does it?
2/3 of the prospects you pitch will refer you to three friends each, do
they?
Here are the next steps you’ll undertake, by channel:
Steps for “Get Out of the Building and Sell” by Channel
 (Figure 9.1)
Get Out of the Building: Find Earlyvangelists
The biggest sales challenge in customer validation is finding the right people
to call on. This involves first identifying and then spending time with true
visionary customers, not mainstream customers. The biggest danger is that
not all visionary customers are alike. As a rule, there are visionaries with
budgets (we like these) and “strategy,” “long-term planning” or “technical
visionary” people without the power to write checks. 
Table 9.1
 describes the
differences. We shouldn’t need to tell entrepreneurs this, but just in case:
focus on buyers with checkbooks. They’re called earlyvangelists, as you
should know by now.
Earlyvangelists have budgets, period. And while all visionary customers
may recognize they have a problem, only the earlyvangelist candidate is (a)
motivated enough to do something about it, (b) perhaps already trying a
home-grown solution and, most important, (c) has the clout and the budget to
solve the problem. Often, earlyvangelists have already visualized a solution
something like the one being presented. They’re partners in this sales process
and will often rationalize or explain any missing features to their own
management. Never ever embarrass or abandon them.
Review the key earlyvangelist characteristics identified in customer
discovery. Do they point to other, additional prospects? Create a target
earlyvangelist list and repeat the appointment-generation techniques used in
customer discovery: generate a customer list, an introductory e-mail, and a
reference story/script. (For a refresher, return to 
customer discovery Phase 2
.)
Even with thorough preparation, assume one of 20 prospects will engage in
the sales process. In other words, be prepared for 95 percent rejection! That’s
OK; it’s early in the process and 5 percent will do just fine. Of those few,
depending on the economic climate, one of three or fewer will actually sign a
purchase order. That’s a lot of sales calls (which defines a startup). Good
news: A sales closer is aboard to handle all the tedium of making contact and
arranging meetings, which founders should always strive to attend.
Distinguish your earlyvangelist targets from other major customer types,
including early evaluators, scalable customers, and mainstream customers.
Scalable customers may be earlyvangelists as well, but they tend to buy later.
Instead of buying on a vision, they buy for practical reasons. These will
become target customers in six months but are still more aggressive buyers of
new products than mainstream customers.
Finally, mainstream customers are waiting for the finished product and
generally need an off-the-shelf, no-risk solution. They might say, “We look
forward to testing your product when it rolls off your production line. We
don’t test prototypes.” Remember their names, since they’ll become
customers in one to two years.
Four Types of Customers
 (Table 9.1)
Checklist 33: Find Earlyvangelists
Goal:
 Identify passionate early visionaries to try to sell
Reference
: Chapter 9, Customer Validation Phase 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
  
Earlyvangelists identified
  
Appointments made
     
  Introductory email
     
  Reference story
     
  Script
  
Hit-rate results tracked
  
List of contacts expanded
Exit criteria
:
     
  Sales appointments with earlyvangelists
Get Out of the Building and Test Sell
Buy a big briefcase and a pile of airplane tickets and kiss the family goodbye,
since this validation phase keeps founders on the road, “test-selling” until the
hypotheses are proved with real orders at or near full price. It’s time to get
face-to-face with more than a handful of earlyvangelists and try to get some
early orders.
Test Selling
Anyone can give away or deeply discount a product to get an order, but that
doesn’t test true buying intentions. Earlyvangelists see the advantage of
getting the new product early, ahead of competitors or envious neighbors.
The earlyvangelist by definition should almost leap across the table and grab
someone by the collar to get early access to the product. They 
need
 the
product to cure a severe pain or secure a competitive advantage (and over
time, they’ll help make the product better). Customer enthusiasm is best-
tested when the product is sold for as close to full price as you can get. In
fact, you want to label access to the product as the “early access program”
and have customers fight to be a part of it. No interest? Then you’ve gotten
valuable feedback on how important the product is to people you’ve labeled
your most valuable customers.
Anyone can give away or deeply discount a product
to get an order.
 
There are two risks in calling on earlyvangelists. One is the request for
customization. Visionary customers might ask for unique extensions or
modifications 
to your standard product. Sometimes these requests are good
news. If enough customers ask for the same set of “custom” features, they’re
not custom at all, since customers are suggesting the “real” product
requirements. The art of being a founder lies in knowing when to incorporate
those requests into the spec and declare them features. The danger and
challenge is to avoid an inadvertent migration to a custom products business
where all the economics change at a disadvantage to the company.
The other earlyvangelist risk is the request for an “exclusive” or a “most
favored nations” clause. From the customer point of view, this is a reasonable
and rational request. “I’m going to take a risk on you, so I want a competitive
advantage by being the only one with your product”—an exclusive. Or, “I
want the best pricing forever” for being first. Tread very carefully here. Often
these are requests from big-company execs with little real-world
understanding of how a startup works. Don’t give up your rights to sell to
other customers or you’ll end as a development arm of the first company that
asks you for an exclusive.
The Sales Process
Entrepreneurs, hate “process,” but some basic steps are critical in any
business-to-business sale. Here’s a primer using enterprise software as the
model:
1
. 
Start with research:
 Know the companies and the individuals you’re
calling on. Use market and web research to gather data. At a minimum,
you should be able to draw their org charts and understand their
financial situations and latest information before making your first sales
presentation.
2
. 
First meeting:
 Use the first meeting to understand the company’s
problems, needs, business goals, and the potential “fit” between your
solution and their problem. Try to gain a sense of how important your
product might be to the company and how it would go about deploying
the product.
3
. 
Know where to “enter:
 Get “to the top” as quickly as you can but not
too quickly. Meet one-on-one first with one or several midlevel people,
and then get in at a high level.
4
. 
Visualize the “before and after:
” Understand how the company solves
the problem today and how your product would better solve it. Try to
deter 
mine the return on investment, the ease of adoption and use, and
how it will save the company time and money.
5
. 
Customize your presentations:
 Do this as early as possible to reflect all
the learning above.
6
. 
Create a purchase action plan:
 Get the buyer visualizing his purchase
and use of the product by discussing the sequence of steps, putting dates
next to each, and talking about things like the launch date to help make
the purchase feel inevitable.
7
. 
Engage senior management at every opportunity:
 Introduce your senior
team to theirs; wine and dine; build bonds with higher-ups who can
either approve or kill the deal.
8
. 
Present a custom proposal and get it signed:
 Need we say more (other
than “celebrate,” of course)? Provide attention and follow-through long
after the check clears.
Collect and Record Sales Findings
As you’re out test-selling, collect and collate the findings consistently,
regardless of who conducts the sales call and whether it happens in a
Starbucks, an office, or a conference room. If more than one of you is out
trying to sell, agree on the key set of facts and feedback to gather on each
call. Include objective metrics like “How many will you use?” or “How many
people will use it?” as well as subjective comments like “If it works, I’ll
recommend it” or “I really like this product better than product X.” Develop a
consistent sales-call report card, similar to the one developed in customer
discovery, to record responses consistently. End every report card by
answering four identical “buy” questions:
Is a purchase order in hand or on the way?
How many units (or dollars’ worth) will the customer purchase?
What’s needed to get a deal signed?
When might the deal be signed?
For best results, record detailed notes in the parking lot, after the
meeting, when details are freshest. Identify follow-up opportunities, action
items, and other 
people to see either at the company or at others the prospect
may have mentioned. Note any competitive products discussed. Then drive
on to the next test-sales session. Remember to send a thank-you note
confirming details and next steps.
While answers other than a purchase order are rarely binding on the
buyer, you should get a good sense of the product’s sales potential.
Aggregate the numbers to create a “probability-adjusted sales forecast,” a
“best guess” of how many dollars will come in and when. In the customer
validation step, many of your initial visits won’t deliver short-term orders.
That doesn’t make the meetings unimportant. Remember, the primary goal is
customer feedback, not sales.
Without a doubt, everyone (including your board!) will focus on the
sales forecast. Try to uncover more about the value proposition, competitive
situation, pricing and, most important, whom to call on and in what order to
make a sale.
Understanding why customers said no is more
important than understanding why they said yes.
Understand where in the process turndowns
happen...
 
Create a spreadsheet summary for the data, making sure to allow plenty
of room for the comments, which are often most valuable of all. Weight the
comments and ratings based on the customer’s size or potential volume. Keep
very close tabs on win/loss statistics on sales calls. Understanding why
customers said no is more important in this step than understanding why they
said yes. Understand where in the process turndowns happen (introduction,
product presentation, organizational issues, not-invented-here issues,
technical issues, pricing) to help refine the sales roadmap.
The Pivot
As optimistic as a startup may be, the most likely outcome of the first sales
push is either no orders at all, or far fewer than you expected. Typically there
are two root causes:
The company hasn’t found earlyvangelists and needs to keep searching
in the current customer segment or abandon it and explore others
Other parts of the business model just aren’t compelling, whether it’s
product, features, benefits, price, issues, partners or several
Either way, you need to stop and think about why what you thought
would happen 
didn’t
 happen. This test-selling effort is still a learning
exercise. This is when you go back to your business model canvas and review
the hypotheses you assembled in discovery. If you can’t get early orders now,
clearly some were wrong. Did you pick the wrong customer segment? Did
the value proposition not match this segment? Did the revenue model not fit
their budget? The business model canvas provides a visual way to diagnose
what went wrong and what you can change and test.
How Many Orders Do I Need to Prove Validation?
One of the first questions founders ask is, “So how many orders do I need to
validate my business model?” While we’d like to tell you the number is 7, it’s
more complicated than that.
You and your board of directors do need to agree
on a number.
 
If you’re selling million-dollar enterprise software packages, three to
five repeatable sales from the same customer segment may give you a good
indication that it’s time to scale a professional sales organization.
However, if you’re selling new kitchenware or appliances through a
consumer retail channel, you won’t know if you have it right until the
channel puts in a reorder.
There’s no one magic number. But you and your board of directors do
need to agree on a number. You and your investors always need to be in sync
about what the criteria are for scaling and the cash burn rate resulting from
that decision.
Checklist 34: Get Out of the Building and Sell!
Goal:
 Test sell the product
Reference:
 Chapter 9, Customer Validation Part 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
     
  Report card for collecting sales findings
     
  First meeting understanding: agenda, goals
     
  Agree on plan to enter at the right level
     
  “Before” and “after” visualized
     
  Customized presentations
     
  Purchase action plan (after positive meeting)
     
  Senior management engaged
     
  Thank-you note with next steps
     
  Custom proposal (signed)
     
  Spreadsheet of win/loss statistics, summarized data
     
  Agreed-upon number of orders to prove validation
Exit criteria
: A realistic sense of the product’s sales potential
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
 (orders to prove validation)
Get Out of the Building: Refine the Sales Roadmap
You developed your 
Sales Roadmap
 earlier on page 344. In this section
you’ll continue to refine it. Only when a team follows the same path through
a company and it results in sales over and over again does the road-map
hypothesis become fact.
Company and Consumer Organization
Startups making sales calls on corporations find that a pattern emerges.
Companies don’t have hundreds of types of org charts but tend to be
organized in one of four ways: by product in operating divisions; functionally
(engineering, marketing, sales, etc.); as a matrix organization by both
function and product; or as a distributed franchise. This makes finding the
repeatable path, and cracking the corporate sales roadmap much easier for an
entrepreneur. So first figure out which of the four types you’re calling on.
The approach is different for consumer products. Consumers may be
organized by archetype, demographics, phychographics or “jobs they want
done.” When trying to reach twentysomethings with a new product, for
example, questions might include:
Is access to a specific demographic segment required? Should the focus
be college students? Parents? Families? Athletes?
How many people have to say yes to close a sale? Is this an individual or
family decision?
If this sale requires that multiple members of a family or group agree, is
there a logical or helpful sequence to use? What’s the script for each?
What steps can derail the entire sale?
Typical Influence Map in a Company Organized by Function
(Figure 9.2)
Using the Organization Chart to Build an Influence
Map
First, get a copy of the company’s organization chart. If you can’t get one,
figure it out by talking to multiple low-level employees. Then map the org
chart into an “influence map,” a map that let you diagram and navigate
friends and foes within a corporation. An influence map starts with the org
chart. Next, locate your earlyvangelist on the chart—the person whose
problem your product solves. Then use the information you’ve gathered in
multiple sales calls to figure out who the influencers, recommenders,
saboteurs and economic buyers are (see 
Chapter 3
). In the example in 
Figure
9.2
, the company is organized functionally. CFO Karen Rogers is the
earlyvangelist. It’s her decision to buy your early, buggy unfinished
enterprise financial software. Her two direct reports, Neil and Suzanne, will
influence her. But before Karen will buy, two in-house competitors must be
at least neutralized if not won over: the financial-modeling and tools-
development staffers in the sales and IT departments. In addition, their bosses
—the CIO and the sales VP—will weigh in before Karen can get her CEO to
sign off on the purchase.
Draw the influence map of each earlyvangelist you call on, looking for
common patterns. As repeatable patterns emerge, sales will come quicker and
easier.
Your customers will teach you how to sell to them.
Refine the Core Strategy
Earlier, you developed 
Figure 8.3
, and learned that you needed to win the
support of four groups to get a deal done. Winning a high-level executive
sponsor and buy-in was the top priority (in this case it was the CFO as the
earlyvangelist with a budget), followed by using that enthusiasm to generate
support from the CIO. With those approvals in hand, next came support from
end users (who work for the CFO) and finally support from the IT staff who
work for the CIO.
Core Strategy
 (Figure 9.3)
Refine the Access Map
How do you get into a potential corporate account? Whom should you call on
first? The most senior executive? While entrepreneurs’ instinct is to get to the
most important and highest-level executives they can find, keep in mind that
you usually don’t get multiple meetings with “C-level” executives. Practice
by calling on lower-level employees until you’re certain you understand you
have a product/ market fit.
After multiple sales calls on a variety of companies, your startup should
have learned which department or departments it should call on first to gain
interest and entry. Once inside the account, summarize the company’s needs,
assemble a sales strategy, present a solution, and work to sell the account.
Figure 9.4
 is an example of an Access Strategy Map.
Key patterns to watch for:
Who should you call on first at a prospect to make a sale fastest?
Who else at the prospect needs to be called on, and in what sequence?
Who will need to approve the sale, and how long will the process take?
Who influences the decision, positively or negatively, and how do you
approach them?
Example of an Access Strategy Map
 (Figure 9.4)
Use the selling-strategy map to answer a wide range of questions,
including:
At what level do we enter the account? High-level executives or
operational staff?
How many people on the organizational map need to say yes in order to
make a sale?
Does each department perceive and care about the customer problem the
same way?
Which executives can influence or sabotage the sale?
In what order should people be called on? How do the scripts vary for
each?
How much purchasing authority does each level you’re dealing with
have? Are they authorized to sign for $1,000? For $100,000? Do they
need anyone else’s approval to deploy a product across their
departments or divisions or to their customers?
Diagram the people involved in a business-to-business sale to identify
the buyer, influencers, in-house competitors and issues that need to be
addressed before a sale is made. See the example of an organizational map
and a selling-strategy map below. Use the tools that make the most sense for
the situation.
Keep refining the access strategy map by making sales calls until a
predictable, repeatable pattern emerges that will work equally well when the
company has 20 or 30 field salespeople instead of two or three. As the pattern
emerges, the selling strategy will, too. You’re not done until clear common
threads have been found. If there aren’t any common threads, get back out
into the field and make even more test-sales calls until a series of purchase
orders and patterns emerge. Keep a keen eye out for “danger” patterns that
may include:
testing or demo requirements before a sale is considered
formal RFP, bidding processes or timetables affecting new-product
consideration
companies requiring that all initial presentations be made only to the
purchasing department
companies that refuse to buy from startups (sometimes the case in
enterprise software)
Example of a Sales Roadmap
 (Figure 9.5)
Develop a Sales Roadmap
The ultimate goal of this exercise is to develop a sales roadmap. This is a
detailed diagram of how to get repeatable orders that you, the founder, hand
to a professional sales VP. It’s the playbook for the repeatable, scalable sales
process. It details every step, every presentation, every e-mail and price, and
every move you’ve learned for getting an order. You write it up as a flow
chart and document each step. Your hiring test of the competence of
prospective sales VPs will be whether they discard it and go back to their old
rolodex or if they use it and refine it.
It’s not sold until the check clears.
The selling process seldom ends when the visionary customer says, “Thumbs
up, I’ll buy.” Particularly in business-to-business sales (as well as sales where
husband and wife must agree), much can happen between the agreement to
buy and the arrival of the check. Recognize and identify any steps required
before the sale is completed and the product is delivered and paid for.
Determine who follows up to manage the process.
For example:
Do the CFO and/or CEO need to approve?
Does the board or procurement group need to approve?
Does Mom or Dad need to weigh in?
Is there a budget cycle, lease or loan requirement in the cycle?
Must the company be an approved vendor?
Are there other systems/components from other vendors? Or other
dependencies like rewiring, adequate power supply, or a renovation that
have to happen first?
Checklist 35: Refine the Sales Roadmap
Goal:
 Develop an effective sales process
Reference:
 Chapter 9, Customer Validation Part 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
  
Corporate organization and influence maps
     
  Influencers, recommenders, saboteurs, economic buyers ID’d
  
Selling strategy map
     
  How account is entered
     
  Who is called on
     
  Order of calls
     
  Presentation
  
Flowchart depicting sales process
  
Steps identified to completing sale, delivering product
Exit criteria
: Playbook for a repeatable and scalable sales process
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Get Out of the Building: Test Sell Channel Partners
If you sell through an indirect sales channel, now is the time to validate the
channel strategy you assembled in 
Phase 1
. Validation means an order or at
least a firm commitment from prospective partners in your sales channel.
(Trying to get orders from channel partners earlier, without enthusiastic
end users, would have been counterproductive. The typical channel partner
response: “That sounds interesting, but will there be any demand for this
product? What do potential customers think?” What the prospective channel
partner was really asking: “Can I make money from this product? If so, how
much?” With actual sales and reports of enthusiasm from their customers, the
answers are far more credible.)
At each meeting, try to learn as much as possible about the potential
channel partner:
Will the channel partner buy and sell the product, based on its value
proposition, proposed pricing, and terms?
What percentage of the product’s retail price will the channel require?
Are there other costs such as freight, advertising, or promotion? What’s
the return policy?
Does the channel partner have any sense of potential sales volume?
Where and how will the partner promote or merchandise the product?
How can the channel be influenced to sell more: bonuses, training for
salespeople, sales meetings or product demonstrations, a golf
tournament? What means of encouraging more sales through the channel
are acceptable and affordable?
Will the channel target buy and sell the product, based on its value
proposition, proposed pricing, and terms?
What percentage of the product’s retail price will the channel require?
Are there other costs, such as freight, advertising, or promotion? What’s
the return policy?
Does the partner have any sense of potential sales volume? Where and
how will the partner promote or merchandise the product?
And the most important... does the channel partner create demand or just
fulfill it, when customers seek out the product.
Sometimes these discussions lead to an early channel stocking order. If
so, congratulations. Make it happen. The initial order may be a test market in
a few stores or a region, or a small quantity “to see how it sells.” Seize this
opportunity, knowing that your primary mission is to learn as much as
possible about the channel, assuring everyone that when the product is ready,
it can actually get to market.
Identify the Channel Targets
Test prospective channel partners of varying sizes and types. Just like
listening to customers, founders should lead the charge in each channel so
that they hear reactions firsthand.
Begin by making lists of the key people to see in each targeted channel,
including contact information and everything known about the target (drawn
from customer discovery research). Getting that first appointment with a
national chain is a hard, low-percentage game, so prepare to be disappointed,
persistent, and tenacious.
Position the meetings as informational in nature, and be prepared to fly
halfway across the country for 20-minute meetings on regular basis. (One
national chain buyer is known to turn over a three-minute egg timer at the
start of sales pitches.)
Where the channel involves retailers, validation is a bit tricky. When
will the product be available in sufficient volume for the retailer to actually
buy it? Will the partner agree to a limited test market sooner, hoping test-
market success leads to far larger, chain-wide orders?
Channel validation also includes meetings with independent sales reps
and distributors. Independent reps have a keen sense of their markets and
usually have a handful of key retail or chain customers whose buying
preferences and patterns 
they know well, largely because their income
depends on it. Talk with these folks in multiple markets. Will the industry’s
No. 1 or 2 rep firm in the region take the product on and sell it once it
becomes available? This is hardly a given, since reps can rarely carry
competitive products. What’s the rep’s sense of his key customers’ potential
for buying and marketing the product? How long will it take to get
distribution, and what kind of volume might the startup expect? Meet with
distributors to discuss the same issues.
A Channel Is Just a Grocery Shelf
One caveat in channel discussions: 
never confuse channel partners with
customers
. Persuading a partner to carry the product, or a big system
integrator to work with your company, is decidedly not the same as getting a
customer to buy. While channel partners may place product orders, they order
only when customer demand pulls the product through their channel. End
users pay the bills; channel partners take your company seriously only when
you drive their revenue.
Never confuse channel partners with customers.
 
The best introduction to a channel partner begins with “we may have
customers for you.” While this seems blindingly obvious, lots of startups fall
into the trap of thinking their sales problems are over once a channel partner
signs up, or they pop the Champagne corks when the first “stocking” order
arrives from an indirect-channel partner. Wrong. Think of all indirect
channels as nothing more than shelves in a grocery store. Until customers
become familiar with the brand, they’ll never search for the product. Until
they pick it up, it isn’t sold. And just like retailers, channel partners are
notoriously slow to pay their bills.
Keeping all this in mind, update the channel/service partner presentation
with information about early customer orders. Then hit the street and present
to them. The goal is to come back with a committed relationship (usually
evidenced by an order). Create a channel sales-call “report card” similar to
the sales report card, and use it to estimate sales that might eventually come
from the channel. At this stage, channel-volume estimates will be difficult,
but you have to start somewhere!
Checklist 36: Test Sell Channel Partners
Goal
: Validate your channel strategy
Reference:
 Chapter 9, Customer Validation Part 2: Get Out of the Building
and Sell!
  
Channel targets identified and researched
  
Meetings scheduled
     
  Introductory e-mail
     
  Reference story and script
  
Channel/service partner presentation updated with early channel
orders
  
Report card for estimating sales from each channel
  
Spreadsheet for summarizing data
Exit criteria
     
  Orders or firm commitments from prospective channel partners
     
  Sales estimates from each channel
  
Pass/Fail tests identified

CHAPTER 10
Customer Validation, Phase Three: Develop
Product and Company Positioning
I
N THIS PHASE OF CUSTOMER VALIDATION
,
 you’ll use all the test results from
your experiments about customers, their reactions to the initial value
proposition, and why they buy. The result is two positioning statements: one
for the company and one for the product. In this phase, you’ll:
develop product positioning
match product positioning to market type
develop a company positioning
make presentations to analysts and industry influencers to validate the
positioning
Positioning is the attempt to control the public’s perception of a product
or service as it relates to competitive products. In Phase 1 of validation, you
crafted 
initial positioning
 for product and company, but formal positioning at
that time 
would have involved too much guesswork. Now, with 50 or 250
face-to-face customer interviews and thousands of online customer
interactions under your belt, the company has real facts about why customers
buy and real customers to help further test and refine your positioning.
Thus far, even through the validation stage, spending on customer
acquisition has been modest and the risks relatively low. But now, as the
company prepares to scale from dozens or hundreds of customers to
thousands or even millions, it needs to be able to communicate what the
product is and does, and why the customer should buy or use it.
No PR Agency
Most technology-driven startups believe they need professional “marketing
people” from a public relations agency to execute this positioning phase. In
reality, the first pass is best-done (and far more affordably) by the Customer
Development team with feedback from Product Development. At this
moment, no one is closer to the customer or better understands what
problems customers say the product solves. No one else has struggled to learn
customers needs, get an order, and find a repeatable sales process. The
Customer Development team is clearly best-qualified to develop a first pass
at describing what makes the company and the product unique. Later, during
customer creation, it’ll be time to bring in the “experts” and their monthly
retainers and invoices. By then you’ll be able to hand them facts explaining
why customers bought.
The Positioning Audit
Before the company spends time on positioning, it’s a good idea to air out the
conference room and get some facts. The best way to do this is with a
positioning audit. An audit is an unbiased way to learn how others perceive
your company and products. An 
external audit
 interviews a representative
sample of people from a variety of categories, including customers who know
or have heard of your company and those who don’t; others who will carry
your message for you (industry analysts and influencers, bloggers, members
of the press, and others); competitors and others who are knowledgeable
about the industry or market.

Example of an External Audit Questionnaire
 (Figure 10.1)
Each interview asks these groups a series of questions about how they
perceive your company and its key competitors: Do they know and respect
your product, your reputation, and your leadership? Do they think your
company is a credible, trustworthy provider of the product or service it’s
selling, and where do they think it fits in the competitive set? The results
form a baseline of the perceptions others have about your company.
Form a baseline of the perceptions others have
about your company.
 
Once you understand what others think (usually a surprise to most
startups breathing the rarefied air of their own conference rooms), the
company can work on changing and shaping those opinions. An example of
an external audit questionnaire for customers, press, influencers, and analysts
is shown in 
Figure 10.1
.
While conducting an audit is the kind of activity pr agencies excel at,
handing this function off completely is a serious mistake in a startup. Just as
your early sales calls were too important to be handled by salespeople, your
early audits are too important to be handed off to a pr agency. The members
of the founding team should at least perform the first five or ten calls
themselves.
Listening to external perceptions of the company is half of this audit
step. Listening inside the company is the other half. An 
internal audit
 directs
the same questions to the founding team executive staff and board members.
Most startups assume they have complete internal unanimity on the all the
issues in the external audit. An internal audit will probably reveal that you
have a cacophony of voices (and you most definitely don’t want to be out of
sync with your investors.) The internal audit should unearth those differences
and extract new ideas. When the company has agreed on a final positioning at
the end of this phase, you communicate those ideas back to the entire
organization so it speaks with one voice.
Develop Positioning: Product Positioning
In this step you’ll put a stake in the ground and formalize the product’s
positioning. The positioning doesn’t have to be perfect, since it will be
refined further during customer creation. The result of this product-
positioning step is a one-page “product positioning brief” that updates the
positioning briefs developed earlier. As sales literature (data sheets, sales
presentations, website and copy) and marketing campaigns are created, this
brief should be used to keep all the messages “on point.”
Feedback from customers and channel partners in customer discovery
and customer validation has continually refined or affirmed the answer to
what your positioning is. You wrote your first version of a positioning
statement when you created the sales presentation, answering the question of
why an early customer should buy the product. Think about customers’
reaction to that description. Did it generate excitement? Was it credible? If
customers couldn’t or didn’t explain why the product was interesting to them
—or not—do you understand why? If not, re-contact them and find out the
reasons. There’s no better input into product positioning than feedback from
folks who were exposed to the product itself.
The Product Positioning Brief
Return to the simple, single-phrase positioning statement you developed at
the outset of customer validation (remember “Absolutely positively
overnight” from FedEx?). Did it resonate with the customers encountered
during the validation process? Did they find think it explained why they
should buy the product or what it did, and did they find it credible and
effective? If not, back to the drawing board.
To refresh your memory, review 
product positioning example
 developed
in Chapter 8 (which may have been several months ago by now):
Example of Product Positioning
 (Figure 10.2)
A thorough positioning effort made soon after customer-validation
interviews will often save the company time and money at the start of
customer creation. If it already knows how to position the new product
against competition in a way that resonates with customers, it can hire a pr or
marketing communications agency and have it get right to work creating buzz
or promotional materials or both. Neither time nor dollars are wasted on
ponderous, costly positioning studies and analyses. Instead, the agency is told
“here’s the positioning. Run with it unless you have a significantly better
idea.” The agency will know how to package the product, the pr messages,
and other marketing communications tools and can get right to work
generating results. (Agencies hate this, because thinking and “strategizing”
are far more lucrative and less accountable activities.)
Product Positioning by Market Type
 (Table 10.3)
Checklist 37: Develop Product Positioning
Goal: Formalize your 
product’s
 positioning by Market Type
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
     
  Initial product positioning brief reviewed
     
  Customer feedback factored in
     
  Product positioning updated and refined
Exit criteria
:
     
  Revised product positioning brief
Develop Positioning: Match Positioning to Market
Type
Market type dramatically changes the messages your company wants to send
about itself and its products. So now it’s time to match the positioning to the
market type you’ve selected.
For an Existing Market
If you’re entering an existing market, company positioning is about creating
the notion that your company is both different and credible. And solves a
problem that customers believe is important. When Apple entered the
smartphone market, people understood that the company was a manufacturer
of iPods but was now going to offer a phone and a web browser, too.
Once your company positioning is chosen, product positioning follows.
Since in an existing market comparable products exist, product positioning
typically describes how and why your product is different along an existing
axis/basis of competition. Differentiation in an existing market can take one
of three forms: you can describe differences in product attributes (faster,
cheaper, less filling, 30 percent more), in distribution channel (pizza in 30
minutes, home delivery, see your nearest dealer, build it yourself on the web),
or in service (five-year, 50,000-mile automobile warranty, 90-day money-
back guarantee, lifetime warranty). Or it can take the form of how the product
fills a need or solves a problem the customer was searching for.
For a New Market
If you’re creating a new market, company positioning can’t be about how
different your company is, since by definition there are no other companies to
compare it with in a new market. So in a new market, company positioning is
about communicating a vision of and passion for what could be. It answers
the questions “What’s wrong with the world that you want to make right?”
and “What is it that your company is trying to change?” When Airbnb
reinvented hotel/motel/bed and 
breakfasts with “peer-to-peer”
accommodations, they first had to communicate a radical idea: people would
want to rent out their homes to strangers who would want to stay in other
strangers’ homes.
After positioning the company, positioning the product in a new market
becomes pretty simple. Touting a new product’s features is unproductive,
since there’s no context for understanding them—no comparable products
exist—and customers have no idea what you’re talking about. If Airbnb had
positioned its service as “rooms for $89” or “sleep in a stranger’s bed” no one
would have had a clue what it was talking about. Instead, Airbnb positioning
talked about a “sharing economy” and emphasized the economic benefits for
both parties.
In a Clone Market
Cloning a business model from the U.S. that hasn’t made it to your country
(due to language, cultural or legal barriers) is a viable business strategy.
Clones are typically found in countries such as China, Russia, Brazil, India
and Indonesia that are large enough to grow companies to substantial size
(greater than 100 million people).
Company positioning can’t be about how different your company is, as
there are no other companies in your country to compare it with, but you can
act as if you can predict the future. You know how the equivalent companies
are positioned in the U.S. Clone their positioning.
The same is true for product positioning. Touting a new product’s
features is unproductive at first, as there’s no immediate context for
understanding the features—no comparable products exist—and customers
have no idea what you’re talking about. But here again you can pretend to be
psychic. You know how the equivalent companies are positioned in the U.S.
As soon as the market is educated, clone their positioning.
For Re-Segmenting a Market
If you’re re-segmenting an existing market, company positioning depends on
market segmentation. Segmentation means you’ve picked a clear and distinct
spot in customers’ minds that’s unique and understandable. Most important,
concerns something they value and want and need now. Company positioning
for this market 
type communicates your deep understanding of customer
problems/needs for un-or underserved markets. And your astute
understanding of how to uniquely solve it.
There are two types of market re-segmentation; a segmented niche and a
low-cost provider. Two examples of low-cost re-segmentation are Jetblue and
Southwest Airlines. Both offer cheap fares matched by minimal frills, they
entered the airline business low-cost passenger airlines that provide high-
quality customer service on point-to-point routes.
There are two types of market re-segmentation; a
segmented niche and a low-cost provider.
 
The rise of Walmart was another example of an entrepreneur’s
recognition that an existing market was ripe for a niche re-segmentation. In
the 1960s and ’70s, Sears and Kmart dominated big-box discount retailing,
opening large stores where there was sufficient population to sustain them.
Smaller communities got catalog stores (Sears) or were simply ignored
(Kmart). Sam Walton saw towns dismissed as “too small” as an opportunity.
“Small towns first” was his unique niche re-segmentation. Once established,
Walmart proudly positioned itself as a “discounter”—a sobriquet the large
retailers avoided like the plague. They sold name-brand health and beauty
aids at cost. This strategy, supported by heavy advertising, pulled in
customers who then bought other products which, while priced low, carried
high gross margins. Equally important, Walmart adoption of cutting-edge
technology to track how people shop and to buy, and its ability to deliver
goods more efficiently and cheaply reduced its cost of sales to a small
fraction of competitors’. By 2002, Kmart was bankrupt and Walmart was the
largest company in the world.
When you’re re-segmenting a market, product positioning is a hybrid of
market and existing market positionings. Since your segmentation has moved
your product into a space adjacent to your competitors, product positioning
describes how and why your new segment is different and important to your
customers.
Checklist 38: Match Positioning To Market Type
Goal
: Ensure product positioning matches company’s market type
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
  
Existing and Re-segmented Markets
: Product compared to its
competitors’
  
New Market
: Vision and passion of what could be communicated
  
Clone Market
: Knowledge of comparative firms used to “predict the
future”
Exit criteria:
     
  Ensure product position matches market type
     
  Validate positioning with customers
Develop Positioning: Company Positioning
With the product positioned in one of the four market types, articulate
company positioning the same way. What’s the difference between product
positioning and company positioning? Product positioning focused on the
specific product attributes within a market type, while company positioning
answers the questions “What does this company do for me?” and “Why do I
want to do business with them?” and “Why does this company exist and how
is it different?”
Write the first version of a company positioning statement as simply as
possible, always keeping customers in mind. Describe the company to
encourage potential customers to say, “Tell me more. It sounds like you’re
solving a problem I have.”
Here’s a great but verbose example from 
Amazon.com
: “We seek to be
Earth’s most customer-centric company for three primary customer sets:
consumer customers, seller customers, and developer customers.” UPS points
to its breadth: “As the world’s largest package delivery company and a
leading global provider of specialized transportation and logistics services,
UPS continues to develop the frontiers of logistics, supply chain
management, and e-Commerce, ...combining the flows of goods, information,
and funds.” One more, from the simpler, more narrowly focused Zappos,
speaks volumes about why you’d want to do business with the company:
“We’ve aligned the entire organization around one mission: to provide the
best customer service possible. Internally, we call this our WOW
philosophy.” Notice, that company positioning is not about product or
features.
Sometimes, founders creating a new market are tempted to name the
new market. This can be helpful or, more often, dangerous and expensive.
Generally it’s helpful only if it helps explain the product’s attributes, with
terms like 
handheld video game
 or 
instant photography
. If the new market
name is cute or esoteric, prepare to spend lots of money explaining the
market and why it’s important to customers, who need a frame of reference to
understand the company positioning. 
No-frills airlines
 and 
movies on demand
explain markets and position new companies within them. Tivo spent
hundreds of millions convincing customers it wasn’t a digital VCR.
Table 10.2
 illustrates company positioning by market type. Like product
positioning, company positioning doesn’t have to be perfect yet, since it will
be refined further during customer creation.
Company Positioning by Market Type
 (Table 10.2)
As with product positioning, the result of this exercise should be a
“company positioning brief,” 
brief
 being the operative word. As marketing
literature (press backgrounder, sales presentations, website) unfolds, this brief
will be used in conjunction with the product brief for consistency’s sake.
As a consistency check for company positioning, revisit the mission
statement written during customer discovery. How did customers react to it
during validation interviews? Did they find that explained why the company
is different or special and encourage them to do business with the company?
In addition, compare the company’s description and mission statement with
those of its competitors. What are their company positionings, and is the new
company’s positioning distinct or differentiated, particularly as buyers are
concerned. Is it simple? Beware: unsubstantiated superlatives like 
easiest,
best
 and 
greatest
 are meaningless. Demonstrable, provable claims like 
fastest
and 
cheapest
 are stronger, although cheapest is a high-risk strategy as a rule,
since competition can quickly respond.
Unsubstantiated superlatives like 
easiest
, 
best
 and
greatest
 are meaningless. Demonstrable, provable
claims like 
fastest
 and 
cheapest
 are stronger.
 
Checklist 39: Develop Company Positioning
Goal
: Articulate Company Positioning
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
  
Mission statement developed in Customer Discovery revisited
  
Company description, mission statement compared to competitors’
  
Company positioning statement drafted
     
  Simple
     
  Keeps customers in mind
     
  What Company does for me
     
  Why do I want to do business with them?
     
  Why does this company exist and how is it different?
     
  Matched to Market Type
Exit criteria:
     
  Statement that fully articulates the Company’s vision and mission
Develop Positioning: Validate Positioning
Industry analysts and influencers help deliver the foundation of credibility
that a startup needs. What’s an industry analyst? In the technology arena,
many firms charge customers to provide an “independent” and dispassionate
analysis of markets, trends, or specific products and their fit in those markets.
These firms vary in size and influence. In some technical markets (enterprise
software, for example) sales to large companies are very difficult until one of
the large analyst firms (Gartner, Forrester, Yankee) has blessed the product,
particularly if it’s new. In the entertainment business it might be Kagan, in
consumer products the NPD group.
Unlike analysts, industry influencers are a less formal category. Every
industry has a handful of pundits who publish articles, write blogs or hold
conferences, and their prominence in the field influences what gets talked
about. Sometimes these influentials work at industry-leading companies but
speak at lots of conferences. Other influentials include writers at general,
business, or trade publications. Sometimes they teach at universities.
Test to see if they’ll sing your company song.
 
Identification of key analysts and industry influencers began in customer
discovery. Meet them and get their insights and feedback on the initial
positioning (market, product, and company) just created and their thoughts
about product features. Test to see if they’ll sing your company song (and if
not, figure out why). Even though early adopters will be evangelizing the
product inside their company or to their friends and family, it helps to have
other “outsiders” who will say, “Yes, we’ve heard of them, and while it’s too
early to say how good their product is, we think their idea is quite valuable.”
It’s also important to line up industry analysts and influencers as references
for press interactions in the customer creation step.
All this would have been difficult without real customer contacts,
feedback, and orders, but now it’s appropriate to contact the analysts and
influencers who have been tracked since early on in customer discovery.
Hopefully, their names were recorded in a database after the company met
them at conferences, seminars, and trade shows. Before any meeting, the
team should spend time understanding their opinions on the market and
product space (if not, don’t use the meetings in this phase to get up to speed;
do the homework first).
Before contacting analysts and influencers, be sure to understand what
companies and industries their firms cover and what particular area or
companies the individual analysts cover. (There’s nothing worse than seeing
the wrong person or even the wrong company. It tells everyone that nobody
did their homework.) Develop a short script explaining why they should
meet. Understand what they cover and explain why the new company will
shake up their market and why the product and company are important. With
this accomplished, the “what’s in it for them” is obvious; they won’t want to
miss an influential and important company. (They’ll almost certainly also try
to sell their consulting services, which at least theoretically have no bearing
on their opinion about the new client’s product.) Make sure to reference early
customers and the problem/pain points that the product solves for them.
When they agree to meet, ask how much time they’ll allocate, what
presentation format they like (formal slides, demo, whiteboard talk, etc.) and
whether the presentation should focus on technology, markets, customers,
problems, or all the above.
Each analyst organization or influencer has a view
of the market or products it covers.
 
Assemble the presentation, keeping in mind this isn’t a sales pitch.
Focus on market and product positioning as well as details of product
features. The objective is to validate the product and company positions and,
wherever possible, to influence analysts’ thinking, not to sell them. Each
analyst organization or influencer has a view of the market or products it
covers—understand that view upfront (know it well enough to draw it on the
board). If creating a new market, get the slides describing its view of the
adjacent markets it will affect.
Meeting an industry influencer may require the same formal preparation
as meeting an analyst, or it may be a lunch at a nearby pub. Do the homework
to understand how the influencers acquire and disseminate information
upfront, and adjust presentation length and style accordingly.
When meeting influencers and analysts, remember that the goal is to
gather feedback (and hope for wild enthusiasm). Also use the interaction to
gather intelligence about the marketplace. Make a mental checklist of critical
learning objectives. For example:
What other companies are doing anything similar?
How does the new company’s vision fit with market needs?
With customer needs?
How can the company best position its product, its place in the market,
and the company itself?
Is the product pricing right?
How does it compare with competitors’ pricing?
The analysts can often clarify who in a company the sale should be
made to and the kinds of obstacles that will be faced. With feedback from
analysts and influencers as well several real customers, continue to the next
and final phase of customer validation.
Checklist 40: Validate Positioning
Goal:
 Validate product and company positioning, and product features
Reference
: Chapter 10, Customer Validation, Phase 3: Product Development
and Company Positioning
  
Meetings arranged with key analysts, industry influencers
     
  Targets tracked and monitored since Customer Discovery
     
  Analysts’ reports, press clippings, websites, etc., researched
     
  Script developed
  
Analyst presentation assembled
     
  Market and product positioning
     
  Product feature details
  
Report card for gathering intelligence, tracking feedback
Exit criteria
:
     
  Detailed feedback about the marketplace and product from key analysts
and influencers

CHAPTER 11
Customer Validation, Phase Four: The
Toughest Question of All: 
Pivot or Proceed?
T
HIS IS THE MOST CRITICAL, MOST GUT-WRENCHING
 phase of customer
validation: honestly determining whether there’s a scalable, profitable
business model ahead. Is the company ready to go forward to the customer
creation step, when millions of dollars are often spent to fuel rapid customer
growth? This step literally “calls the question” about the company’s future
directions. It’s time to study all the test results, all the customer learning and
all the insights you’ve had from the facts you’ve gathered. Its time to see if
the company is ready to start spending money to scale, and that the result will
be a great, profitable company.
There are three steps to answering the crucial “pivot or proceed” question:
Assemble and review all key discovery and validation findings
Review the business model hypotheses and their interactions with one
another
Focus on the “metrics that matter” in the financial model
Pivot or Proceed: Assemble Data Findings
By this point, the team has assembled a massive amount of hard data:
industry research, customer segments, customer feedback, marketing
program results, channel and cost input and much more. The data needs to be
verified, with any gaps, discrepancies, or anomalies filled in along the way. A
few examples:
The company needs 10,000 customers in order to be profitable, but the
market isn’t that large
Customer acquisition or channel costs are too high, rendering the
company unprofitable
The sales roadmap is too long and complex, making the cost of sales
way too high
Despite best efforts, referrals just aren’t delivering additional customers
These anomalies are relatively easy to spot when all the data is collected
in one room. They often call for further customer, channel, or product
development discussions. At times, they drive a business model pivot.
The best way to “translate” piles of data, is to make
it as visual as possible.
 
Build a War Room
The best way to “translate” piles of data, reports and questionnaires is to
make it as visual as possible. For best results, lock the founding team in a
room for a day or two to walk step by step through each hypothesis. Cover
one wall with a blown up “final” business model canvas. Cover the other wall
with the hypotheses themselves, sorted to keep the pieces of each hypothesis
together (remember, many hypotheses have multiple parts). Use another wall
for supporting diagrams, and allow space for 
the most recent canvas and
perhaps one or two earlier iterations. Leave a large whiteboard available for
keeping score of questions and changes and for the key “metrics that matter”
numbers that emerge (discussed in detail in 
Step 3
). While not every diagram
is appropriate for your startup, review:
a 
work-flow map
 of the prototypical customer that diagrams how
customers do their jobs or live their lives both with and without the new
product
an 
organizational/influence map
 showing whom consumers or
businesspeople interact with, how often, and how those people influence
buying decisions.
customer archetypes:
 how they earn and spend their money and use their
time
a market map
 showing where your customers will come from
a channel or sales roadmap
 diagramming how sales will happen
a fully updated business model canvas
 (along with a few earlier
versions)
Review the Data
The most important hard data to review includes:
customer feedback, particularly from sales report cards evaluating
customer enthusiasm for the product and its potential sales revenue over
time
market size and market share estimates
channel feedback and revenue potential summaries
pricing, customer acquisition costs, and any major product cost changes
detailed information about the industry, the customers, and their
behavior
competitive product and pricing information
The team, often including investors, should review all the materials to
ensure that all the learning from discovery and validation has been integrated
into the latest versions of the hypothesis documents and into an updated
version of the business model canvas that will be discussed in the next step.
The key activity at this stage is to look at the intersections of, or interactions
among, the business model components, since no doubt many components
have changed along the way. The process is a healthy one, and the results
fuel the next steps of the pivot-or-proceed process.
Look at the intersections of, or interactions among
the business model components.
 
The Business Model Checklist (
Figure 11.2
) gives you and your
management team the questions you should be asking and worrying about.
Print them out. Keep them handy. And worry “Am I going to bet my
company that I got them right?”
Checklist 41: Assemble Data
Goal:
 Assemble all data, reports, questionnaires, map, diagrams, etc., for full
review
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
     
  Workflow map of the prototypical customer
     
  An organizational/influence map
     
  Customer archetypes
     
  Fully updated business model diagram (plus a few prior versions)
     
  Customer feedback from sales report cards
     
  Market size and market share estimates
     
  Channel feedback and revenue potential summaries
     
  Pricing, customer acquisition costs, and any major product cost changes
     
  Detailed information about the industry, customers and their behavior
     
  Competitive product and pricing information
Exit criteria:
     
  All key feedback, hard data, diagrams and the most recent business
model canvas assembled for review
     
  Learning from Discovery and Validation incorporated into latest
versions of the hypotheses documents and updated Business Model
Canvas
     
  Intersections of/interactions among business model components
reviewed
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Pivot or Proceed: Validate Your Business Model
It’s been a long road but you’ve converted most of your business model
hypotheses from customer discovery into facts. You’ve done so by extensive
testing through face-to-face customer interactions. So, if the customer-
relationships hypothesis said one of every five acquired customers will
activate and pay for the service or app, this actually happened in validation,
with hundreds if not thousands of customers. Or you’ve proven that people
return to the product or app three times a week for an average of 20 minutes
per visit or spend $100 a month visiting once.

Review Business Model Hypotheses
 (Figure 11.1)
The team should assemble data collected in the last phase in its “war
room” use the checklist to walk through the business model hypotheses, box
by box, and ascertain that there are factual, definitive answers to at least
every question on the checklist.
In this final phase of customer validation the company asks itself the
same questions it asked in Phase 4 of customer discovery. But at this point, it
should have much more quantitative, irrefutable proof of the answers, since
you’ve spoken to far more customers and conducted many more tests.
The Business Model Canvas as a Scorecard
Hopefully you’ve been taking regular snapshots of your business model
canvas – either week-by-week snapshots, or at least at each major pivot. If
you’ve done it this way you now essentially have a film strip of the
entrepreneurial process.
As you can see from 
Figure 11.1
, each stage of discovery and validation
refined the canvas. Experiments were run, learning caused iterations and a
few pivots, and all were documented in a new canvas (
reread this section for
tips
).
Now that you have your canvases up on the wall use them as a point of
discussion.
The answers to “Is this a business?” can be found in
the results of the multitude of tests you’ve
conducted throughout the validation process.
 
The answers to “Is this a business?” can be found in the results of the
multitude of tests you’ve conducted throughout the validation process. As is
often the case, when the results aren’t convincing enough, or when they don’t
deliver the traffic or financial targets of the business model, it’s time to iterate
or pivot, and retest to see if the new approach improves the results. After all,
the company will very shortly be spending millions of dollars in the customer
creation phase, where results are expected to be far more predictable, and
much more is at risk. While this may seem ambitious and unreasonable, the
closer a company is to this “fact-based plan,” the greater its chances for
business and fund-raising success.

Business Model Checklist
 (Figure 11.2)
Checklist 42: Validate Business Model
Goal:
 Use facts gathered to validate the business model
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
  
Business Model Checklist
     
  Value Proposition
     
  Customer Segments
     
  Value Proposition 2: Market Type
     
  Channels
     
  Customer Relationships
     
  Cost Structure
     
  Revenue Stream
Exit criteria:
     
  Ensure all business model hypotheses have been converted into facts
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Pivot or Proceed: Validate the Financial Model
This step answers one key question: do all the tests point to a scalable, sizable
business? And can it happen before the company runs out of money?
In this step, you’ll figure out whether you have a potentially thriving
business, a hobby, or a tax loss.
Answering the question doesn’t require pounds of Excel spreadsheets or
50-item budgets. It relies more on the facts you’ve developed by testing your
original hypotheses with the only people who have the answers, your
customers, and with a short list of numbers, the 
metrics that matter
.
A mere handful of numbers define the difference
between a scalable, profitable business and a
failure.
 
A mere handful of numbers define the difference between a scalable,
profitable business and a failure. Successful entrepreneurs will be able to
recite, adjust, and recompute this handful or so of key numbers about
customers, product costs, and revenue growth while they sleep. Meanwhile,
they’re always focused on the two metrics that matter most: how many
months’ worth of cash remain in the bank? And how fast are we burning
through what’s left?
We guarantee that this different approach to finance will get you thrown
out of just about every business school in the country, but it’s all that’s
needed at this stage to determine whether your business model passes the
validation test and is ready to move on from validation to scale in customer
creation.
Metrics that Matter
Since page 1 of this book you’ve been using the business model canvas to
organize your testing. In this section we’re going to use the canvas to
organize your financial model. This is a radically different approach
compared to more typical use of 5-year revenue forecast spreadsheets. Think
of it as bringing your “report card” home to Mom and Dad—hopefully, a
report card full of A’s and A+’s, since B and C responses do not a great
company make. Some elements of the business model represent revenue or
costs, while others fuel growth. Physical and web/mobile channel costs vary
widely, as do rates of sale and growth, so one last time we’ll examine the
metrics three different ways:
In a physical channel, less than a dozen numbers usually tell the entire story:
Value proposition:
 What are product cost, market size, attainable market
share, and customer impact of network effects?
Customer Relationships:
 What are customer acquisition costs, prospect
conversion rates, customer lifetime value, and customer switching costs
that the company may have to pay?
Market Type:
 As discussed in 
Chapter 1
, different market types drive
different revenue curves to consider in longer-term revenue predictions
Cost Structure:
 What are the basic operating costs of the business?
Channel:
 What are the costs of selling through the channel? Channel
margin, promotion, shelf-space charges?
Revenue Streams:
 What are the average selling price, total achievable
revenue, and number of customers a year?
Burn Rate
 (derived from the above): How much cash is the company
“burning” (spending) a month? When will the company run out of cash?
There’s no precise formula for what a burn rate should be, but since it’s
the issue over which boards most often fire their founders, the founders
and investors must agree on what the burn rate should be and how many
more pivots the startup can afford in its search for the scalable,
profitable business model
Assemble all your test results to provide a forecast for the coming year,
which begins on Day One of Step 3 of Customer Development, the customer
creation process.
We doubt there have been many startups where the year-one financial
results of customer creation matched the “metrics that matter.” But any VC,
uncle or rich neighbor is going to want to know why you think an investment
in your startup will deliver startup-size returns. If at the end of this step the
numbers are ugly—yup, you guessed it—turn back to the beginning of
discovery, or at least customer validation, and start revising and retesting
your hypotheses.
Three things to consider before you dive into Metrics That Matter:
Use the time frames that make the most sense for your startup.
Generally, the longer the physical-channel sales cycle (think enterprise
software), the longer the “space” between calculations should be. Here
we used a quarter-by-quarter forecast
An analysis like this can—and should—often stop the pivot–or-proceed
process in its tracks if the computation forecasts that the company will
either run out of money within the year or won’t be able to raise enough
funds to survive the first year of customer creation
Don’t be in a hurry at this critical step. As an entrepreneur, if you take a
pile of money to move forward here and fail, it will at least cost you a
significant portion of your founders’ equity, and it will often cost you
your job
Metrics that Matter Scenarios
Metrics matters are a radically new approach to startup math. They’re best
illustrated by example. The spreadsheet scenario on the following pages
illustrates how you can use “Metrics that Matter” to evaluate your business if
you are selling a physical product in a physical channel.
Metrics that Matter: Example
“EZ Gardener” in a Physical Channel
Let’s take a look at 
Table 11.1
 what the metrics that matter for a
physical channel would look like in spreadsheet form.
Here’s a simple example of a rough quarter-by-quarter cash-burn
computation for our hypothetical $30 (suggested retail) EZ Gardener all-in-
one gardening-tool set, sold in garden stores and by mass merchants. Our
timing is the coming year. (The spreadsheet starts Day One of the customer
creation process.)
“Metrics That Matter”: Physical Channel Model
 (Table 11.1)
Note: the leftmost numbers refer to commentary in descriptive text that
follows.
A few things about the hypothetical business factored into the numbers
above:
This “friends and family” funded venture begins customer creation with
$500,000 in the bank. Like most physical-channel marketers, EZ
Gardener also promotes online. But they read this book, followed
directions, and are “getting the most important channel right first,” so
they’re not selling product online yet
In year two, as the product’s newness wears off, the price drops.
Product development was completed earlier offshore, so there are no
more development costs until we see how this product sells
Revenue never scales dramatically, since the market type is “re-
segmenting/niche market”
What Metrics Matter?
There are 11 metrics that matter in this spreadsheet. Following the left-hand
column of the spreadsheet, let’s explore the origin of each number as well as
its source a little more closely:
1.
   Total number of units sold:
 This number is estimated (ideally by
quarter) from customer validation report cards used with buyers and
channel partners. Compare these numbers with your estimates of total
addressable (or if known, serviceable) market and your 
market share
estimates
. Use the two sets of numbers to estimate the number of units to
be sold in each quarter. If customers make multiple purchases within a
year, factor it in.
2.
   Average retail selling price:
 How much the consumer will pay, on
average, for the product. This number, developed in the value proposition
hypothesis, should be validated in the competitive analysis and
throughout customer and channel validation conversations. It’s shown
here as the price per unit and is often the average selling price, since retail
pricing may vary by channel.
3.
   Gross sales across all channels:
 Total retail-dollar sales for the product
per quarter. Relatively straightforward to compute, since the company is
using only one sales channel. Remember to consider “guaranteed sale”
situations where retailers can return unsold merchandise for full credit.
4.
   (Less) channel discount (40%):
 What percentage of the product’s retail
price will the channel take as its cost of sales? Deduct it from the retail
price and apply it to all channel revenue as computed in No. 3. We’ve
assumed a fairly typical chain-store margin here. This revenue will never
reach the company’s coffers, so deduct it now to get to net company
revenue.
Channels are notorious for charging suppliers for
advertising, promotion, and shelf space.
 
5.
   (Less) other channel costs:
 Channels are notorious for charging
suppliers for advertising, promotion, and even shelf space. There may
also be costs of independent sales reps or brokers who “sell in”
merchandise to the channel. In the first year, the company may want to,
or be forced to, purchase special promotions in order to get shelf space in
an important retail channel. Estimate these costs based on channel-partner
discussions.
6.
   NET COMPANY REVENUE:
 The net channel revenue (No. 6) is the
Gross Sales (No. 3) minus the channel discount (No. 4) and other channel
cost (No.5).
7.
   (Less) sales costs (reps, trade shows):
 How much does it cost the team
to reach the garden product channel cost? In addition to specific customer
acquisition costs, the company will spend money on a sales force, sales
and marketing materials, attendance at trade shows and more. These costs
should be identified in the customer-relationships box and perhaps also in
the cost structure box.
8.
   (Less) product costs:
 What does it cost to build and make the product?
Developed primarily from the value proposition and cost structure boxes,
this is an estimate combining two sets of costs:
     •   in this example the cost of developing the product is fully paid for
     •   the manufacturing cost of the physical product itself
9.
   (Less) current operating costs:
 Compute the costs of “turning on the
lights” at the company every day, which should be a relatively static
number: meager founder salaries, other payroll, rent, equipment, utilities,
legal, and the like. This number usually shifts the least, so worry about it
less than others. The spreadsheet increases it modestly late in the year and
in the second year, as is typical.
10.
  CASH BURN FOR PERIOD:
 Did we make or lose money this quarter?
How much? Start with the net company revenue (No. 6) and subtract all
the costs beneath it, Nos. 7, 8, and 9. The result of that equation is the
“cash burn,” or the reduction in the company’s bank account each quarter.
In the example above, the company is losing money, or “burning cash,”
until the fourth quarter, when customer growth and reduced product-
development costs improve the company’s cash flow quite dramatically.
11.
  CASH REMAINING:
 Start by counting the money in the bank on Day
One of the quarter. Our hypothetical company began its first year of
customer creation with $500,000 in the bank. Reduce it by the quarter’s
cash burn to determine how much will be left at quarter’s end.
If These Were Your Numbers, What’s a Founder to
Do?
This is a “nice little business,” and while it will make a lovely living for its
founders and a nice return for its investors, it’s hardly a scalable business like
the many heroes of Silicon Valley. But even though this company is returning
as much pretax profit in year two as it had in the bank on day one of year one,
it’s basically going nowhere fast. It’s a one-product company, and the only
way it got strong revenue growth was by reducing its retail price—never a
good sign.
Some things the founders and board should really be discussing:
Are there any potential dramatic changes to the business model that can
have significant impact on the company’s future growth prospects?
What about overseas markets? Are they a growth opportunity?
How can the company capitalize on its one modest success. Are they
building a brand enough, and creative enough, to perhaps launch other
products both in and beyond the garden area. They might start with
“EZWeeder” and “EZhoe” first, and perhaps expand to “EZgrass” or
“EZflowers” to take maximum advantage of their brand, credibility and
channel relationships to scale the company broader and faster?
Can they extend beyond the garden, maybe adding “EZcooker” or
“EZcleaner” or “EZcleanup” perhaps? Regardless of the new products,
the company would need to spend some serious product development
dollars and spend heavily on marketing (especially if moving beyond the
garden) with no assurances of further success. (They actually need to
develop a whole new set of hypotheses)
Unless the company invests in new product development, this business
is more of a hobby than a scalable business
Hold these thoughts—and others—for the final section of this phase, the
pivot-or-proceed discussion. Next, look at the second of three business
models for a software product sold in the web and mobile channels.
Some Final Thoughts About the Financial Model
Market Type Affects Revenue Streams.
 Each of the four market types has a
distinctive sales-growth curve shaped by the degree of difficulty involved in
transitioning from sales to the earlyvangelists to sales to mainstream
customers. Obviously in new markets, it typically takes considerable time for
the product to catch on beyond earlyvangelists, who aren’t typically high-
volume mainstream buyers. So success with early sales doesn’t guarantee fast
revenue scaling.
The sales-growth curves for a new market and an existing market
graphically illustrate the difference. Even after finding and successfully
selling to earlyvangelists, the rate of sales differs in later years because of the
different adoption rates of mainstream customers.
Revenue Growth in New and Existing Markets
 (Figure 11.3)
Estimating revenue in an existing market is relatively simple: Look at
the incumbents and calculate the increasing percentage of market share the
startup will grab each year.
Estimating a new market’s size might seem impossible, since it doesn’t
exist yet. What to do? Estimate the opportunity based on proxies and adjacent
markets. See if there are any comparable companies. Have others grown as
fast as the estimate? Why will this startup perform similarly?
Revenue Growth in a Resegmented Market
 (Figure 11.4)
The sales curve in a re-segmented market is somewhat easier to
estimate. It’s generally similar to that of a new market in that it takes time to
gather a head of steam. There are three steps to assessing a re-segmented
market: assess the size of the existing market, figure out how large your
startup’s “segment” is, and calculate the adoption rate, or the time it will take
for that segment to recognize the new product as the solution of choice.
Count only the segment that will switch, and beware of long-term contracts,
service contracts, and “sunk costs” such as training and installation, all of
which are often “lock-ins” or hidden barriers to switching.
Revenue growth curves depend on Market Type!
 
Demand Curve Affects Revenue:
 The “demand curve” seeks the optimum
intersection between sales volume and net profit. For example, if a physical
product is most efficiently manufactured in lot sizes of 5,000, can that
inventory be sold in a reasonable time when current unit sales are 50 a
month? A startup selling new electric cars for $29,000 will generate massive
demand. But if they cost $45,000 to manufacture, the company will go
bankrupt very quickly. Consider:
the actual price per unit, for multiples, and for subscriptions
how pricing can be used to attract more users
how pricing can create larger or more frequent purchases by the same
user; volume discounts, free shipping, loyalty points and similar pricing
mechanisms are used for what’s typically called “market basket”
optimization
how pricing can be used to enhance profitability or volume
how the company can forward-price the product to intersect the
economies-of-scale curve (as in, “If we could build 10,000 at a time, our
production cost drops 32 percent”)
When to Bring in the Accountants
Eventually, prospective investors, banks, and others will want to see the
traditional P&L, forecast, and more, and that’s fine. Once the metrics that
matter are firmly understood to make sound business sense 
and are validated,
almost any finance type (or high school math student) can convert them into a
VC-ready multiyear P&L spreadsheet, balance sheet, and cash-flow statement
(the “usual stuff” everyone is accustomed to seeing) with ease.
On rare and welcome occasions, metrics that matter actually don’t
matter at all. If customer acquisition and activation are proceeding at warp
speed month after month or the economy is hot, investors may ignore most of
the other metrics, throw caution to the wind, and vote to scale the company
rapidly. This seldom happens, but we hope it happens to you. It can happen
more often in frothy vertical markets, as it did in social networking and other
multi-sided markets or strong IPO markets,. But nine times out of 10, the
metrics that matter do matter quite a bit when it comes time to spend serious
investor dollars.
Adding it all up
This phase is a vital make-or-break analysis of how well the business model
should work. But remember that the numbers are still only educated guesses,
validated—we hope—through extensive customer discovery and validation
effort with scores if not hundreds of customers.
Checklist 43: Validate Financial Model
Goal:
 Ensure the startup can become a profitable, scalable business before it
runs out of money
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
  
Value Proposition
     
  Product cost
     
  Market size
     
  Attainable market share
     
  Customer impact of network effects
  
Customer Relationships
     
  Customer acquisition costs
     
  Prospect conversion rates
     
  Customer Lifetime Value
     
  Customer switching costs
  
Market Type considerations
  
Basic operating costs
Channel costs
     
  Channel margin, promotion and shelf space fees
  
Revenue streams
     
  Average selling price
     
  Total achievable revenue
     
  Number of customers/year
  
Cash balance
  
Do the Math
Exit criteria:
     
  A full financial picture of the company’s ability to succeed
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
Pivot or Proceed: 
Re
-Validate the Business Model
It’s the perfect time to take one last look at the key business model
components, for several reasons. In a few days, a great deal will change if the
vote is “go forward” to the customer creation step. Customer creation is a
radically different stage during which the company suddenly shifts from
“searching for a business model” to “executing one.” It’s no longer
celebrating mistakes and wrong turns. It shifts full-throttle into “execute”
mode, with revenue targets and timetables to hit, product and plans to deliver,
and more granular and precise accountability to investors and board
members.
The company is about to spend a great deal of money far faster, and
irrevocably, as it works ambitiously to deliver its chosen business model.
With that comes the typical “career risk” for founders, which always prompts
investors to ask if the seemingly manic “founder type” should be replaced by
a “seasoned” leader with proven execution skills. Massive amounts of money
are about to be spent on a single, focused bet that the business model, as
developed, has a high likelihood of scaling to profit and success. Boards and
investors are suddenly less forgiving and typically far less welcoming of
reports like “That idea was wrong” and “That didn’t work as we hoped” than
they were during the earlier “search” phases.
Long story short, it’s time to revisit the core business model elements
one last time.
Best Bets
You’re almost done. You’ve run the numbers in the last section and are still
feeling like your business is a winner. But have you picked the best value
proposition? Is your product delivery schedule right? Are you confident
you’ve gotten the optimum revenue model and costs? And have you missed
any best moves on the overall business model? Here are a few last things to
check.
Make Sure the Value Proposition is Right
After going through the “metrics that matter” in the last section, are you
absolutely convinced you have the right value proposition? You’re about to
live with it for awhile. If you don’t feel that it’s going to win the marketplace
now, it doesn’t get better over time. It may be time to reconfigure, repackage
or unbundle the product. This requires a loop all the way back to customer
discovery. Once there, use the core technology to develop another product,
configuration, distribution method or price and then modify product
presentations and return to Phase 3 (product presentation) and do it again.
Yes, it hurts, but it hurts far less than failure.
Make Sure the Product Delivery is Right
Even with selling success, check the product delivery timing with the
product-development team. Schedules inevitably change, seldom for the
better. Can the company still deliver what was just sold and do so as
promised, or was the sale actually vaporware? If vaporware, at best the
company secured a few pilot projects. Continuing to sell as if nothing has
changed is a bad idea. As schedules slip, hard-won earlyvangelists weaken,
and references evaporate quickly. The good news is, if this happens (it
happens often), the situation is still recoverable. There aren’t many people to
fire, and the burn rate is low. (As discussed earlier, it’s always important to
have enough cash to get this phase wrong at least once.) The solution is to
shut down any additional selling for a while, admit mistakes, and turn pilot
projects into something useful—first for the customer and then as a
marketable product.
Make Sure the Revenue is High and Costs are Low
There’s nothing worse than leaving money on the table or spending more
than you needed to. The best way to answer these questions and more is to
“walk” slowly through the business model one more time.
Start with the value proposition. Are there too many features or not
enough variety? Would a lower price sell far more units or sell the same
number at a lower acquisition cost? What if the product were free, or
free to those bringing three or five or 10 other customers along?
In the customer-relationships hypothesis, is there rock-solid confidence
in the plan, or might a freemium or multi-sided alternative deliver
bolder, faster growth? Will that costly AdWords effort deliver the
planned result?
Can a different channel deliver fewer sales and more profit?
Will partners deliver the revenue growth you need and expect?
Are there higher level business model patterns you may have missed?
Make Sure Your Business Model is Right
Grab a fresh business model canvas and a pack of Post-it notes. Explore
alternatives seriously. The team is about to put a big pile of chips, probably
millions, on “red” or “black,” as in “pass” or “fail.” Is everyone confident the
choice is the right?
Changing direction at this juncture is a bold move indeed. It’s not what
the investors expected, especially after a long, grueling process of customer
discovery and validation. Then again, bold moves are the work of great
entrepreneurs. And even though a pivot at this point leads to more customer
validation and more time, it’s far better to pivot now than to forge ahead at
full speed and full spend if it’s possible that there’s a better idea out there
somewhere.
Further validate the business model, not just looking for enhancements
in revenue opportunity and places to reduce cost, but looking for “game
changers.” Can you change a product sold by features into a branded-
experience that becomes a “got-to-have-it” fashion? Can you change a
revenue model from a unit sale into a network effects model? Look for the
non-obvious business patterns. Even if the team is certain the current model
is the best way forward, now’s the time to bring in your advisory board and
have them throw stones (painful as it is) at your canvas. Do they see a huge
move that you missed? No doubt the financial model review just completed
raised at least a handful of questions and perhaps pointed to some
opportunities. Revisit the business model checklist questions. Are any of the
answers different? Does the team want to have more money in the bank or
spend less? Where can savings be effected or additional dollars efficiently put
to good?
If the team has turned over every possibility in its review, looking both
at radical changes and modest improvements in the business model, and
confidence still carries the day, it’s time to move on to the ultimate question:
pivot or proceed?
Checklist 44: Re-Validate The Business Model
Goal:
 Further validate the business model
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed? Revalidate the Financial Model
  
Business Model Canvas revisited
  
Business Model Checklist revisited
     
  Value Proposition
     
  Customer Segments
     
  Value Proposition 2: Market Type
     
  Channels
     
  Customer Relationships
     
  Cost Structure
     
  Revenue Stream
Exit criteria
:
     
  Determine if the company is making the best bet possible
     
  Assess if revenue is as high and costs as low as they can realistically be
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
The Toughest Startup Question: Pivot or Proceed?
This is the moment of truth when the team and the investors will vote on
whether to begin spending massive amounts of money to execute the business
model. To vote honestly, the team needs to take a hard, honest look at the
pivot-or-proceed analyses developed in this phase.
As grueling as the customer validation process is, it’s quite likely that
the company will require another turn of the wheel before everyone can
enthusiastically vote to move forward. Don’t despair—this need to pivot
arises almost every time, and often calls for a return all the way to customer
discovery.
Hubris
 is the evil twin of a passionate entrepreneur.
 
The alternative is even more painful. In the past, investors magically
assumed flawless execution and fired executives who failed. It’s time to
reflect, thinking seriously about the company’s genuine chances for scalable,
profitable success. It’s a hard decision, particularly for self-confident
entrepreneurs who pride themselves on their tenacity, and problem-solving
abilities. “I’m an entrepreneur. I make things happen against all odds” just
doesn’t cut it when staring at the hard facts and statistics. Don’t confuse
hubris with passion or facts.
Did validation really convert opinions to facts, or is everyone just
moving the goalposts to reach customer creation? The next step seriously
cranks up the company’s cash burn rate, sharply diminishing if not
extinguishing available cash or runway.
Did the product sell well and easily? Is it absolutely, unequivocally clear
that when more money is spent to acquire customers, they’ll arrive at a
steady, predictable, 
profitable pace? This question in particular probably
sends 90 percent of startups back into the depths of Customer Development
to refine and retest components of the business model.
If the “ramp” to more customers, revenue and profits isn’t proved to be
predictable in test results, it’s also a reason to pivot. Using everything you
learned in customer validation, go back to Phase 1 of this step (get ready to
sell) and try it again. Sorry. This isn’t easy to do.
If everything checks out (again, it seldom does the first time around), the
end of customer validation is a major milestone. Customer problems are
understood, a set of earlyvangelists has been found, and the company has
delivered a product its customers want to buy, developed a repeatable and
scalable sales process, and demonstrated a profitable business model.
Hopefully, all the learning is captured in writing and the business model
diagram is updated. Fund-raising, while never easy, will be far easier than at
this point than it was before.
When you’ve answered “yes” to that taxing list of questions, you
deserve a night off, if not a week. Congratulations! The company is prepared
to move full speed ahead to the customer creation process.
Checklist 45: Pivot or Proceed?
Goal:
 Decide whether to execute the business model
Reference
: Chapter 11, Customer Validation, Phase 4: The Toughest
Question of All: Pivot or Proceed?
     
  Did the Validation effort really convert opinions to facts?
     
  Business model diagram is updated
     
  Did the product sell well and easily?
     
  Is it clear that customers will continue to arrive at a steady, predictable,
profitable pace?
     
  Repeatable and scalable sales process developed
     
  Product delivery timing checked
     
  Confirmation that company can deliver on what was sold, do as
promised
     
  Profitable business model demonstrated
     
  Move forward or pivot?
Exit criteria:
     
  An informed decision about whether to move forward
  
Pass/Fail tests identified
The Startup Owner’s Manual for
Physical Channel Startups
Index
A
  |  
B
  |  
C
  |  
D
  |  
E
F
  |  
G
  |  
H
  |  
I
  |  
J
K
  |  
L
  |  
M
  |  
N
  |  
O
P
  |  
R
  |  
S
  |  
T
  |  
U
V
  |  
W
A
a/b testing
     
of collateral
,
     
of landing page
,
access map, customer
,
acquisition
     
without activation
,
     
business model as basis of
,
     
cost of
,
     
defined
,
     
earned and paid tactics for
,
     
pairing activation with
,
     physical. 
see
 
“get” customers (physical)
     
re-validating rate of
,
     
testing
,
     
tools
,
     
see also
 
“get” customers (web/mobile)
activation
     
acquisition as combined with
,
     
acquisition without
,
     
assessing ease of
,
     
defined
,
     
plan components
,
     
testing
,
     
tools off the website
,
     
tools on the landing page
,
     
see also
 
“get” customers
adoption
     
customer feedback on
,
     
by earlyvangelists
,
     
researching process of
,
     
total cost of ownership/adoption (TCO)
,
advertising
     
forms of online
,
     
as paid media source
,
     
revenue, calculating
,
     
validation with
,
     
see also
 
multi-sided markets
advisory boards
,
affiliate marketing
,
affiliate revenue
,
agile development
     
pairing customer development with
,
analysts
,
Apple
,
attrition
,
audience
     
distinct
,
     
earlyvangelists as validation
,
     
for pass/fail tests
,
     
small
,
     
tuning collateral materials to
,
audits, company
,
awareness
     
drivers of
,
     
as first “get” customers stage
,
     
marketing materials for
,
B
bits
,
bloggers, reaching out to
,
“Blue Ocean Strategy” (Kim and Mauborgne)
,
board members
     
communication with
,
     
customer development adoption by
,
     
internal audit by
,
     
startup metric tracking by
,
bubble economies
,
budget. 
see
 
cost
; 
spending
business model canvas
     briefs. 
see
 
hypotheses briefs
     
guides validation priorities
,
     
hypotheses tests using
,
     
overview of
,
     
team review of
,
     
as validation scorecard
,
     
weekly score keeping via
,
Business Model Generation
 (Osterwalder)
,
business models
     
of channel partners
,
     
cloning existing
,
     
customer discovery/validation tests
,
     
customer-facing aspects of
,
     
financing
,
     
for multi-sided markets
,
     
pivot-or-proceed review of
,
     
re-validating
,
     
revenue forecasts to refine
,
     validating
          
checklist for
,
          
by team meeting
,
          
with test sales
,
business plan
,
business-to-business sales
     
catering collateral to
,
     
checkpoints for
,
     
pricing
,
     
process
,
buyable startups
,
“buzz” creation
,
C
capital equipment
,
cash burn
     
via premature scaling
,
     
re-validation before
,
     
validating rate of (web/mobile)
,
channels, sales
     
choosing
,
     
customer feedback on potential
,
     
managing
,
     
mapping responsibilities in
,
     
for multi-sided markets
,
     
partners
,
     
the phone as
,
     
revenue as affected by
,
     
revenue sources within
,
     
testing
,
     
validating (web/mobile)
,
     
as validation priority
,
     
validation speed as affected by
,
     
see also
 
physical channels
; 
web/mobile channels
check-in calls, customer
,
churn
,
clone market
     
company positioning for
,
     
defined
,
     
product positioning for
,
cloned business models
,
collateral materials (physical product)
,
companies, large
     
entrepreneurship within
,
     
marketing methods of
,
     
product adoption by
,
     
selling strategy map for
,
     
software sales to
,
company positioning
,
competition
     
competitive pricing
,
     
“coopetition”
,
     
in existing markets
,
     
hypotheses brief on
,
     
online research of
,
complaints, addressing
,
conferences, industry
,
consideration phase
,
consignment
,
consultants
,
consumer products
,
“contact us”
,
content, landing page
,
contracts
,
“coopetition”
,
copyrights
,
cost
     
budgeting
,
     
calculating revenue to
,
     
imposing high-switch
,
     
per tier “food chain”
,
     
re-validation of
,
     
see also
 
pricing
cross-sell programs
,
customer acquisition. 
see
 
acquisition
customer activation. 
see
 
activation
customer archetypes
     
budgeting based on
,
     
compiling
,
     
for decision-maker research
,
customer behavior
     
online tracking of
,
customer creation
     
analyzing preparedness for
,
     
as “execute” mode
,
customer data
     
constant collecting of
,
     
for day-in-the-life analyses
,
     
“scoring”
,
     
turning hypotheses into
,
     
when to ignore
,
customer development
     
informs vision
,
     
Manifesto
,
     
success via
,
     team
          
face-to-face validation by
,
          
meetings
,
          
positioning by
,
          
replaces traditional titles
,
customer discovery
     
end of, proving
,
     
four phases of
,
     
GE Energy Storage case study
,
     
goal of
,
     
re-validation prompting more
,
     
weekly score-keeping for
,
customer feedback
     
on acquisition trends
,
     
via advisors
,
     
answers questions
,
     
in customer discovery phase
,
     
enthusiasm assessment via
,
     
as essential
,
     
on everything
,
     
iteration as driven by
,
     
market research via
,
     
in new markets
,
     
from pass/fail tests
,
     
pivots in response to
,
     
on sales materials
,
     
setting appointments for
,
     
speed of web/mobile
,
customer relationships
     
create demand
,
     
marketing based on
,
     
re-validation of
,
     
validating (web/mobile)
,
     
see also
 
“get, keep, and grow” customers
customer retention. 
see
 
retention, customer
customer segments
     
marketing based on
,
     
for physical products
,
customer service
,
customer validation
     
determines product/market fit
,
     
determining preparedness for
,
     
E.piphany as case study of
,
     
face-to-face
,
     
founders lead
,
     
four phases of
,
     
as “get ready to sell”
,
     
metrics for tracking
,
     
overview of
,
     
priorities
,
     
sign of completed
,
     
spending constraint in
,
     
with users
,
customers
     
access maps on
,
     
on the advisory board
,
     
channel partners are not
,
     
determining sufficient
,
     earlyvangelist. 
see
 
earlyvangelists
     
influences on
,
     lifetime value of. 
see
 
lifetime value
     
in new markets
,
     
self-identifying
,
     
tracking
,
     
types of
,
     
understanding
,
     
see also
 
“get, keep, and grow” customers
customer-satisfaction survey
,
customization
,
D
Demand creation testing cost
,
dashboard
,
data sheets
,
dealers (retailers)
,
decision-makers
     
accessing corporate
,
     
defined
,
     
as sales target
,
     
users as
,
delivery schedule
,
demand curve
,
demand-creation
     
partners do not generate
,
     
physical vs. web/mobile
,
     
see also
 “get” customers
demos
,
dependency analysis
,
direct mail
,
direct sales
,
discounts
,
distributors
     
analyzing potential
,
     
mapping responsibilities of
,
     
physical
,
     
in sales channel food chain
,
E
earlyvangelists
     
catering MVP to
,
     
collateral materials for
,
     
customer validation with
,
     
defined
,
     
have budgets
,
     
identifying
,
     
payment by
,
     
risks of
,
     
urgency of
,
     
vision as bought by
,
earned media
,
economic buyers
,
E-mail
     
capturing
,
     
marketing via
,
     
renting lists
,
E-mail cascades
,
end users
,
engineering
     
acquisition tools
,
     
designs for hypotheses tests
,
     
feature-adding by
,
     
iterative
,
enterprise software
,
E.piphany
,
equipment lease lines
,
errors. 
see
 
mistakes
“execute” mode
     
customer creation as
,
     
excludes learning/discovery
,
     
of startup within GE
,
“executing” business models
,
     
see also
 
customer creation
executives
     
delaying sales pitch to
,
     
influence maps on
,
     
skills needed in startup
,
     
unlearning of traditional sales
,
existing markets
     
company positioning for
,
     
competition in
,
     
defined
,
     
product positioning for
,
     
product-intro into
,
     re-segmenting. 
see
 
re-segmented markets
     
TAM and SAM portions of
,
     
tools for analyzing
,
experiments
     
diagramed
,
     
insight gained from
,
     
pass/fail metrics for
,
     
with physical goods
,
     
product mock-up for
,
external audit
,
F
Facebook
,
factoring
,
failure. 
see
 
mistakes
features, product
     
adapted via customer feedback
,
     
competitive list-building of
,
     
limited MVP
,
     
list of
,
     
over-adding
,
     
in solution presentation
,
financial model. 
see
 
revenue model
financial resources
,
founders
     
channel partner tests by
,
     
customer validation as led by
,
     
interaction with customers
,
     
internal audit by
,
     
passion-driven
,
     
previous employers of
,
     
vision/instinct of
,
     
work with sales closer
,
free trials
,
free-to-paid conversion
,
G
GE Energy Storage
,
“get, keep, and grow” customers
     
customer discovery phase (physical)
,
     
customer discovery phase (web/mobile)
,
     
customer validation phase (web/mobile)
,
     
overview of
,
     
as validation priority
,
“get” customers (physical)
     
cost of
,
     
four stages of
,
     
materials to drive
,
     
via media exposure
,
     
tactics for
,
“get” customers (web/mobile)
     
as acquisition/activation
,
     
activation plan for
,
     
cost of
,
     
how to, during validation
,
     
refining tactics for
,
     
social networks accelerate
,
     
testing
,
     
tips for
,
“Get Out of the Building”
     
for customer validation
,
     
as essential approach
,
     
to sell
,
     
to test perceived problem
,
     
to test solution/product
,
     
for web/mobile products
,
global maximum
,
Google
,
Groupon
,
“grow” customers (physical)
,
“grow” customers (web/mobile)
,
H
high-fidelity MVP
     
as validation tool
,
home page. 
see
 
landing page
human resources
,
hypotheses briefs
     
acquisition based on (web/mobile)
,
     
on the business model canvas
,
     
on the competition
,
     
on customer segments (physical)
,
     
defined
,
     
to “get, keep, grow” (physical)
,
     
to “get, keep, grow” (web/mobile)
,
     
on key resources
,
     
on market size
,
     
on market type
,
     
on physical sales channel
,
     
on revenue streams
,
     
reviewing
,
     
value proposition (physical)
,
hypotheses tests
     
on the business model canvas
,
     
customer discovery as
,
     
during customer validation
,
     
designing
,
     
determining end of
,
     experiments for. 
see
 
experiments
     
metrics for tracking
,
     
partners for
,
     
in pivot-or-proceed phase
,
     
rules to follow
,
     
as trial and error
,
I
implementation plan
,
incentives
     
as acquisition tool
,
     
as activation tool
,
     
for retention
,
     
understanding channel partners’
,
independent sales-rep firms
,
industry analysts
,
influence maps
,
influencers
     
advisory board members as
,
     
as customer type
,
     
data on
,
     
industry
,
insight
,
intellectual property
,
internal audit
,
Iridium
,
IT department
,
iteration
     
continuous
,
     
via “failure”
,
     
from lukewarm product response
,
     
speed of
,
     
weekly score-keeping for
,
     
see also
 
pivots
J
joint new business development
,
K
“keep” customers
     
physical
,
     
web/mobile
,
     
see also
 
retention, customer
key partners
,
key resources hypothesis
,
key supplier relationships
,
L
landing page
,
latent problem
,
lead generation, online
,
lifetime value, customer (LTV)
     
as revenue consideration
,
local maximum
,
lock-in, customer
,
Logan, Prescott
,
low-fidelity MVP
     
assessing interest in
,
     
“get, keep, grow” tests with
,
loyalty programs
,
M
mainstream customers
,
market research
,
market size
,
market type
     
cost of entry by
,
     
data sheets by
,
     
defined
,
     
hypotheses
,
     
knowing your
,
     
positioning statement by
,
     
product positioning by
,
     
pros/cons of
,
     
relevance of contacts to
,
     
sales by
,
     
validating (web/mobile)
,
     
see also
 
clone market
; 
existing markets
; 
new markets
; 
re-segmented
markets
marketing
     
agency, hiring
,
     
collateral (physical)
,
     
to “grow” customers
,
     online
          
creative
,
          
via email
,
          
importance of
,
          
lowers costs
,
          
via the phone
,
          
for physical products
,
          
tips for
,
     
“push” and “pull” in
,
     
team
,
     viral
          
customer base for
,
          
defined
,
          
referrals as
,
market-requirements document (MRD)
,
mass merchandisers
,
media
     
earned and paid
,
     
exposure cost
,
metrics, performance
     
essential for startups
,
     
for “get” tactics
,
     
for hypotheses tests
,
     
retention monitored by
,
     
for test sales
,
     
tracking cost
,
     
validating financial
,
microsites
,
Microsoft
,
minimum feature set
,
minimum viable product (MVP)
     
brief on
,
     
earlyvangelists’ adoption of
,
     
estimated launch of
,
     “high fidelity”. 
see
 
high-fidelity MVP
     “low fidelity”. 
see
 
low-fidelity MVP
     
minimal features in
,
     
as proposed “solution”
,
     
web/mobile
,
mission statement
,
mistakes
     
channel vs. end user sales
,
     
cost money
,
     
importance of
,
     
intellectual property
,
     
made by Iridium
,
     
in traditional sales method
,
mobile products. 
see
 
web/mobile products
Moore, Geoffrey
,
multi-sided markets
     
activation plan for
,
     
earlyvangelists in
,
     
financial considerations for
,
     
“get” approaches for
,
     
“Get Out of the Building” for
,
     
physical channels in
,
     
validation priorities for
,
N
national wholesalers
,
network-effect virality
,
new markets
     
company positioning for
,
     
customer discovery in
,
     
defined
,
     
naming
,
     
problem presentations in
,
     
product positioning for
,
     
profit timeline
,
     
tips for entering
,
next-selling
,
niche markets. 
see
 
re-segmented markets
O
online lead generation
,
online marketing. 
see
 
marketing
orders
,
organization maps
,
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs)
,
Osterwalder, Alexander
,
outreach programs
,
outsourcing
,
P
paid media
,
partners
     
channel
,
     
discovered via hypotheses tests
,
     
for hypotheses testing
,
     
key
,
     
types of
,
passion
,
passive problem
,
patents
,
pay-per-click (PPC)
,
pay-per-use
,
personal advisors
,
phone calls
     
to “keep” customers
,
     
as powerful sales tool
,
     
to referred customers
,
     
to solicit pass/fail testees
,
physical channels
     
customer discovery in
,
     
“get, keep, and grow” for
,
     
market research in
,
     
marketing strategies
,
     
overview of
,
     
test sales to partners in
,
     
validation of
,
     
web/mobile as combined with
,
physical products
     
capital sources for
,
     
customer segments for
,
     
problem presentation
,
     
solution presentation
,
     
strategic alliances for
,
physical resources
,
pivot-or-proceed
     
business model validation
,
     
data assembly for
,
     
as final validation phase
,
     
as moment of truth
,
     
revenue model validation
,
     
three steps to answering
,
     
tools to assess
,
     
web/mobile data to review
,
pivots
     
business model canvas guides
,
     
continuous
,
     
after problem presentation
,
     
product repackaging
,
     
in response to test sales
,
     
before spending/scaling
,
     
see also
 
iteration
portfolio pricing
,
positioning
     
company
,
     
need for
,
     
statement
,
     
validating
,
     
see also
 
product positioning
PowerPoint presentations
,
pr agency, 
see
 
public relations
pricing
     
business-to-business sales
,
     
customer feedback on
,
     
demand-curve effects on
,
     
lists
,
     
in solution presentation
,
     
techniques
,
     
of test sales
,
     
see also
 
cost
problem presentations
,
problem/need (customer)
     
active/acute
,
     
current solutions to
,
     
earlyvangelists’ awareness of
,
     
measuring product/market fit for
,
     
online acquisition tests of
,
     
positioning statement address to
,
     
varying intensity of
,
     
understanding
,
problem/solution fit
,
problem/solution hypotheses
     
list of product benefits for
,
     
testing
,
product development
     
advisors
,
     
for earlyvangelists
,
     
feature list for
,
     
for the few, not the many
,
     
of MVP
,
     
positioning by
,
     
after problem presentation
,
     
and re-validation
,
product positioning
     
customer development team develops
,
     
how to develop
,
     
by market type
,
     
statement
,
product specs
,
product-based pricing
,
product-introduction, traditional
     
customer development is not
,
product/market fit
     
determining
,
     
lack of
,
     
measures of successful
,
product/service resources
,
product-update bulletins
,
prototypes
,
provisional patents
,
public relations
,
R
“razor/razor blade” model
,
recommenders
,
referrals, customer
     
as best “get” approach
,
     
as revenue source
,
     
test magnitude of the problem
,
     
tips for encouraging
,
     
as viral marketing
,
reference story
,
referral banners
,
repackaging
,
repeatable business model
,
re-segmented markets
     
assessing size of
,
     
company positioning for
,
     
defined
,
     
how to create
,
     
via low-prices
,
     
mapping
,
     
product positioning for
,
     
sales-growth curve
,
     
two types of
,
resellers
,
resources, key
,
retailers
     
mapping responsibilities of
,
     
as physical sales channel
,
     
return rights for
,
     
in sales channel food chain
,
     
validation tests for
,
retention, customer
     
ease of online
,
     
long-term
,
     
physical channels for
,
     
tracking
,
     
web/mobile tactics for
,
return on Investment (ROI)
,
return rights
,
revenue model
     
customer lifetime value factor
,
     
mapping channel relationships in
,
     
for multi-sided markets
,
     
re-validation of
,
     
revenue forecasts via
,
     
sales channel factor
,
     
validating
,
     
as validation priority
,
     
for web/mobile products
,
revenue sources
     
“growing” existing customers
,
     
by product and channel
,
     
validating (web/mobile)
,
     
for web/mobile products
,
reversible decisions
,
risk
     
in customer creation phase
,
     
of earlyvangelist sales
,
S
saboteurs
,
sales
     
acquire/activate tools for web/mobile
,
     
by channel partners
,
     
to channel vs. end user
,
     
closers
,
     
cost
,
     
delivery schedule evaluation
,
     
determining quantity of
,
     
to earlyvangelists
,
     funnel
          
“get” customers as
,
          
marketing drives into
,
          
model of
,
          
predictability of
,
          
roadmap
,
          
see also
 
“get” customers
     
materials (physical)
,
     
measuring complete
,
     
pitch
,
     
preparing for
,
     
presentations
,
     
reps
,
     
solution presentation is not
,
     
strategy mapping
,
     
VP
,
     
see also
 
business-to-business sales
; 
“test” sales
sales roadmap
     
adoption assessment for
,
     
for complex corporate sales
,
     
customer discovery as informing
,
     
“execution” prior to
,
     
importance of
,
     
overview of
,
     
refining physical
,
     
testing physical
,
sales team
     
closer on
,
     
mapping strategy for
,
     
materials to support
,
     
unlearning by
,
     
use of roadmap by
,
scalability
     
financial
,
     
testing
,
scalable customers
,
scaling
     
analyzing dependency before
,
     
business model re-validation before
,
     
premature
,
Schwab
,
search engine optimization (SEO)
,
“search” for business model
     
“execution” as confused with
,
     
failure as integral to
,
     
by GE Energy Storage
,
     
non-linear
,
     
preserve cash during
,
     
skills needed in
,
     
transition to “execution”
,
search-engine marketing
,
selling strategy map
,
served available market (SAM)
,
social marketing tools
,
social networks
     
as acquisition tool
,
     
brief sales pitches on
,
     
fill needs/desires
,
     
market size needed for
,
     
marketing via
,
     
retention via
,
software sales
     
collateral materials for
,
     
to Fortune 500 companies
,
     
process of b-to-b
,
     
repackaging product for
,
solution
     
customers’ attempts at
,
     
sign of faulty
,
     
testing
,
solution presentation
     
physical
,
     
post-visit assessment
,
     
tips for
,
spending
     
on acquisition
,
     
constraining
,
     
customer validation accelerates
,
     
market type as driving
,
     
re-validation before
,
     
validation before
,
startups
     
within big corporations
,
     
“failure” as essential to
,
     
intellectual property ownership by
,
     
job titles in
,
     
key components of
,
     
metrics for
,
     
mission of every
,
     
as passionate
,
     
speed/tempo of decision-making
,
     
spending tempo for
,
     team. 
see
 
team, startup
     
visionary instinct of
,
     
winning vs. losing
,
strategic alliances
,
stuffing, channel
,
subscriptions
     
lifetime value of
,
     
as pricing model
,
suppliers
,
switching costs, high
,
systems integrators
,
T
target market
,
team, startup
     
business model canvas review
,
     
as human resources
,
     
pivot-or-proceed meetings
,
     
sharing info among
,
     
skills needed for
,
     
successful web/mobile
,
technology gatekeepers
,
“test” sales
     
to channel partners
,
     
customer validation as
,
     
to earlyvangelists
,
     
learning from
,
     
physical
,
     
pivots in response to
,
     
purpose of
,
     
validate business model
,
textlinks
,
total addressable market (TAM)
,
total cost of ownership/adoption (TCO)
,
tracking customers
,
trade secrets
,
trade shows
,
trademarks
,
traffic
     
competition for
,
     
partners
,
“try now” links
,
U
unbundling
,
updates, product
,
upsell
     
as “grow” tactic
,
user engagement
     
as “get” tactic
,
     
inviting
,
user testing
,
V
value equation
,
value pricing
,
value proposition
     
goal of
,
     
hypotheses
,
     
on the landing page
,
     
by market type
,
     
marketing based on
,
     
re-validation of
,
     
test sales prove
,
     
validating (web/mobile)
,
     
as validation priority
,
value-added resellers (VARs)
,
vendor financing
,
venture capital
,
viral loop
     
in “get, keep, grow” (physical)
,
     
in “get, keep, grow” (web/mobile)
,
     
in “get” process
,
     
from “grow” to “get”
,
     
in “keep” process
,
viral marketing. 
see
 
marketing
viral products
,
vision
     
customer development informs
,
     
demos/prototypes deliver
,
     
earlyvangelists as buying
,
     
in product brief
,
     
reviewing product
,
     
of solution, by customers
,
     
testing founders’
,
volume pricing
,
W
web/mobile channels
     
assessing
,
     
customer discovery in
,
     
metrics evaluating
,
     
physical as combined with
,
     
product as salesman in
,
     
validation checkpoints
,
web/mobile products
     
attracting customers to
,
     
business model validation for
,
     
customer segment identification
,
     
earlyvangelists’ use of
,
     
“Get Out of the Building” for
,
     
“get ready to sell” actions
,
     
hypotheses tests for
,
     
market sizing for
,
     
MVPS for
,
     
prevalence of
,
     
pricing
,
     
push notifications
,
     
refining “get” activities for
,
     
sudden take-off of
,
websites
     
functionality of
,
     
layout tips
,
     
marketing via
,
     
research via
,
wholesalers
,
word of mouth
,
Glossary
A/B Testing
 compares one version of a web page with another and sees
which produces the best results.
Acquisition
 is the first step in the web/mobile “get/keep/grow” sales funnel.
It gets people to visit your website, where you can then 
activate
 them by
getting them to engage, purchase, or at least register for future sales efforts.
Specific customer acquisition categories include 
earned
 and 
paid media
, and
tactics include search (SEM/SEO), e-mail, PR/blogs, viral, social nets.
Activation
 is the second step in the web/mobile “get/keep/grow” sales
funnel. After you 
acquire customers
 you get them to register, participate or
purchase on the website. Specific customer activation tactics include free
trials, home/landing page.
Agile Development
 is the engineering method used to develop products
(hardware, software or services) iteratively and incrementally with flexibility
to react to customer feedback. It recognizes that customer needs and the final
product spec cannot be fully defined a priori. Agile is the antithesis of
Waterfall Development
.
ARPU
, or Average Revenue Per User, is a measurement of revenue typically
applied by subscription services like cellphone or data plans to measure
average long-term spending.
Awareness.
 In the physical channel, it is the first step in the “get customers”
sales funnel. Tactics include earned media (pr, blogs, brochures, reviews),
paid media (ads, promotions), online tools
Business Model
 is the description of how an organization creates, delivers
and captures value. In this book it specifically refers to Alexander
Osterwalder’s 9-box 
Business Model Canvas
.
Business Plan
 is a document written by existing companies to describe and
launch follow-on or adjacent market products. It was mistakenly used for
startups for decades until it was realized that no business plan survives first
contact with customers. Typically has sections labeled: opportunity, industry
background, competitive analysis, marketing plan, operations plan,
management summary and financial plan.
Canvas
 refers to Alexander Osterwalder’s 9-box 
Business Model Canvas.
 In
this book we use the canvas to capture our business model hypotheses and as
a scorecard over time.
Channel
 is the sales and/or distribution channel. How the product gets from
your company to the customer. This book talks about “physical channels”
and “web/mobile channels.”
Channel Stuffing
 fills your sales channel with more product than the channel
has end-user demand for. Used as an often-illegal tactic to inflate company
revenue (when revenue is recognized as shipped to the channel, rather than
shipped from the channel to the end customer).
Churn
 (sometimes called Attrition) is the number of customers or
subscribers who leave a service in a period of time. Usually measured in
monthly percentages. If 1 of 10 customers leave, the churn rate is 10%.
Cohort
 analysis is the measurement of a specific unchanging group of
customers over time.
Collateral materials
 are the brochures, data sheets, white papers, sell sheets
and other literature companies generally in physical channels develop to
market their products or services.
Consideration
 The third step in the physical purchase decision cycle or
“sales funnel.” The sales funnel includes awareness, interest, consideration
and purchase.
Company Building
 is the fourth of four steps in the Customer Development
process. Founders reorganize the company from one focused on 
searching
 for
a business model into building an organization that can 
execute
.
CPA
 (cost per acquisition) The price web businesses pay to purchase
referrals or customers from partners or other web businesses.
CPM
 (cost per thousand) is an advertising industry measure for purchasing
media, whether it be magazine ad space or banners on websites. Ad pricing is
based on CPM. A magazine selling 6,000,000 copies has 6,000 “M’s” to sell.
Cross-Sell
 is a tactic to grow existing customers by encouraging them to buy
complementary products, increasing their average order size. “Buy this other
book and get 10% off.” Or “buy this suitcase and add the toiletry kit.” See
Up-Sell
.
Customer Archetypes
 are detailed descriptions of customer traits, including
hard (demographics, psychographics, etc.) and soft (interviews, anecdotal
material) customer data to form a descriptive profile 
and an entire story
about
 a typical type or group of the company’s customer(s). (Most startups
typically have more than one archetypical customer.) Archetypes are used by
both product and customer development to better focus on the target
customer.
Customer Development
 first described in the Four Steps to the Epiphany, is
the four-step process to organize the search for a repeatable and scalable
business model. Executed by the 
Customer Development Team.
Customer Development Team
 replaces the traditional Sales, Marketing and
Business Development in the discovery and validation steps of startups. The
team is responsible for validating the business model hypotheses in front of
customers. The team must have at least one founder with the authority to
change the company’s strategy.
Customer Discovery
 is the first of the four steps of Customer Development.
In Discovery, founders articulate their hypotheses about the business model
and then run experiments to test problem and solution in front of customers.
Customer Relationships
 are the strategies used by companies to 
get
customers into its sales channel, 
keep
 them as customers, and over time 
grow
their value to the company through additional revenue and customer referrals
from them.
Customer Segment
 defines a single subset of a startup’s customer universe
and how they differ from others, as in “50+ golfers who play more than twice
a month,” often including the a problems/needs they have. Companies define
specific 
value propositions
 for each segment.
Customer Validation
 is the second of the four steps of Customer
Development. In validation, founders take their tested hypotheses and try to
get initial orders/users/ customers.
Customer Creation
 is the third of four Customer Development steps. In
creation, once founders validate their business model, they expand sales and
marketing activities to grow.
Data Chief
 is the senior executive at mobile/web companies who monitors
and continually optimizes the results of customer acquisition, activation and
retention efforts. Sometimes known as the CMO, VP-Marketing or database
marketer.
Demand Creation
 is the specific set of acquisition activities to drive
customers into a startup’s chosen sales channel(s). It’s the “get” customers
portion of the “Get/Keep/Grow” process of creating Customer Relationships.
Earlyvangelist
 is a concatenation of “early adopter” and “evangelist.” In a
startup earlyvangelists are the company’s first customers, who buy the
product very early because it solves a problem or fills an urgent need for
them.
Earned Media
 is the free exposure a company generates. It includes a wide
range of exposure tools including SEO or natural search, press releases,
product reviews, editorial features. Earned media are part of a company’s
“Get customers”
 programs.
“Executing” a Business Model
 is what companies do 
after they have found
a repeatable and scalable 
business model
. It is how companies grow revenue
once they have refined and proven their plan to do so. It requires significant
organizational changes. See 
Search
.
Experiments
 are what startups conduct to test hypotheses. Experiments are
designed as objective pass/fail tests. For example: “We believe we can
acquire users with Google Adwords at a cost of 20 cents per click.”
External Audit:
 is a survey of outsiders’ perception of the company and/or
its product, gleaned from interviews with consumers.
Eye Tracking
 is a tool that tells you the path users’ eyes follow on a web
page. Extremely useful for eliminating guess work in web page design. See
heat maps
.
Get, Keep and Grow
 activities are the steps companies take to acquire,
retain and grow their customers. 
Getting
 customers, sometimes called
demand creation, drives customers into a chosen sales channel(s); 
Keeping
customers, or retention, gives customers reasons to stick with the company
and product; and 
Growing
 customers involves selling them more and
encouraging them to refer new customers.
“Get out of the building”
 is a key tenet of Customer Development. It
observes that unlike an existing company, in a startup there are no facts
inside the building, so founders need to get outside to talk to customers. It’s
the customers who can turn the startup’s many guesses about its business
model into facts.
Heat Maps
 are tools that tell you where users’ eyes focus first, second and
third on a web page page. It is based on 
eye tracking,
 which literally observes
where users’ eyes go on a web page.
High-fidelity MVP
 is the simplest minimum viable product (i.e. a website
with the core features implemented, a demo of the physical product) and is
often quite rudimentary or “rough and dirty.” It is used to gather feedback
about the validity of the customer 
solution.
 See 
low-fidelity MVP
.
Home Page
 (sometimes called the “landing” page) is the initial or principal
web page of a company’s product or website. See 
landing page
 and 
splash
page
.
Hypotheses
 are the educated guesses a startup’s founders have about their
Business Model Hypotheses. Hypotheses are drawn on the Business Model
Canvas, and tested and refined throughout the Customer Development
process.
Internal Audit
 is a survey of what employees understand, perceive, or
believe about the company, and its product, and their positioning. 
See
external audit
.
Iteration
 is a minor change to one or more of the nine boxes of the business
model canvas. (For example, a pricing change from $39.99 to $79.99 or
customer segment from boys 12-15 years old to boys 15-19.) See 
Pivot
.
Interest
. In the physical channel, Interest is one of four steps in the “get
customers” sales funnel. 
See 
awareness
.
Landing Page
 (sometimes called the “splash” page) is the web page that
appears when a customer clicks on a link, ad, or e-mail. It can sometimes be a
company’s home page. The landing page displays sales copy that is
connected to the ad or link. See 
home page
.
Lean Startup
 is a combination of Customer Development and Agile
Development popularized by Eric Ries.
Local/Global Maximum
 are the results of hypotheses tests, that may show a
short-term low-level response (the local maximum). This contrasts with the
global maximum – the best possible test result, sometimes overlooked in
short-term market testing.
Low-fidelity MVP
 is the simplest minimum viable product (i.e. a landing
page with a sign-up to get more information, a cardboard mockup of a
physical product) used to gather feedback about the validity of the customer
problem
. 
See 
High-fidelity MVP
.
Loyalty Programs
 are tactics such as “points” and “frequent shopper
programs” used to “keep” existing customers and reduce churn. See 
churn
.
LTV (LifeTime Value)
, usually calculated in dollars, reflects the total
revenue a customer is worth over the lifetime of his relationship with the
company. (This book arbitrarily picks three years.) LTV helps calculate how
much a company can afford to spend to acquire a customer.
Market Type
 refers to the four startup market entry strategies:
     1)  entering an 
existing
 market with a higher performance product
     2)  
resegmenting
 an existing market (via a niche or low-cost strategy)
     3)  creating a 
new
 market where one never existed before
     4)  creating a 
clone
 market – copying a business model from another
country
Microsites
 are small sub-websites within a larger site dedicated to a single
purpose (like a retirement planning site with a big bank website) that are
often used to attract customers’ attention from both within and outside the
site itself.
Minimum Feature Set
 is another term used to describe 
Minimum Viable
Product
.
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
 is the smallest group of features that will
elicit customer feedback. Initially the MVP could be as simple as a
PowerPoint slide, a video or demo. For web/mobile products it can be a 
low-
or high-fidelity MVP
 that illustrates the “core” customer problem/need and
demonstrates the product’s solution.
Multi-sided Business Models
 may have several different customer
segments. Each segment may have a different value proposition, revenue
model and channel. For example, Google’s search business has users who
pay nothing to use its search site, and an advertiser or payer segment that uses
its AdSense site and pays to reach the search users. Other business models,
such as medical devices, may be even more complex and have four or more
“sides” customer segments such as patients, doctors, insurers and hospitals.
Paid Media
 is media exposure that’s purchased on TV, billboards, direct
mail or the web. 
See 
earned media
.
 Paid media are part of a company’s 
“Get
customers”
 programs.
Physical Channel
 is a sales and fulfillment channel with physical points of
distribution and customer contact. Can include warehouses, retail stores,
direct sales people. See 
web/mobile channel
.
Physical Product
 is a product made out of atoms. Cars, planes, computers,
and food are physical products, but social networks and search engines are
not. See 
web/mobile products
.
Pivot
 is a substantive change in one or more of the nine boxes of the business
model canvas. (For example, a revenue model change from freemium to
subscription model or a customer segment shift from boys 12-15 years old to
women 45-60.) See 
Iteration
.
Pricing
 describes the tactics a startup uses to determine how much it will
charge in order to implement a profitable 
revenue model.
 (i.e. Freemium,
Subscription, tiered or volume pricing, etc.)
Problem/Need (Customer)
 is why customers buy. In some markets
customers rationally recognize they have a 
problem
 and search for a product
that can solve it. (Think software, snow tires, catheters) In other markets
products may be purchased for an emotionally perceived 
need
. (Movies,
fashion, video games, social networks.)
Product Development
 is the engineering group building the product. The
process
 startup product development teams most often use to build the
product is called 
Agile Development.
Reference Story
 is an introductory explanation used when first contacting a
prospect via e-mail or phone. It emphasizes the problems you’re trying to
solve, why it’s important to solve them, the solution you’re building, and why
it should be of interest to the prospect.
Revenue Model
 describes the 
strategy
 of how a company will make money.
It answers the question, “Where will the revenue be coming from?” For
example, eBay makes a small fee on every transaction on its site, while
Netflix charges a monthly subscription. Also 
see 
pricing
.
Sales Closer
 is the individual on the Customer Development Team
responsible for “closing” (bringing in the order) initial earlyvangelist sales.
They deal with the sales logistics founders may not have experience with
(negotiating with purchasing agents, contract terms, etc.) They are not sales
managers, and likely 
not
 going to become the company’s VP of Sales.
Sales Funnel
 is a visual metaphor for tracking sales progress shaped like a
dumbbell. Consists of “Get/Keep/Grow” activities. Wide at the top with raw
leads coming in, the “Get” stage of the sales funnel narrows at each stage as
the leads get qualified and turn into suspects, then prospects, then probable
closes, until finally an order comes out of the narrow neck of the funnel. The
“Keep” portion is narrow like a pipe, and the “Grow” part of the funnel
widens to represent ever increasing revenue from an existing customer base.
Sales Roadmap
 provides details of how to execute each step of the 
sales
funnel:
 who at a company to call on, in what order, to make a sale.
“Search” for a Business Model
 is what startups do 
before
 they have found a
repeatable and scalable 
business model
. Searching uses the Customer
Development process described in this book. See 
execution
.
Sell-in
 is the first order a channel places for a new product. It can also be a
seasonal order like the pre-Christmas sell-in.
Sell-through
 the volume of product sold by the channel to the ultimate
consumer. When products are “sold through,” they can seldom be returned to
the company. See 
channel stuffing
.
Splash page
 is an archaic term for landing or home page. 
See 
home page
.
Split Testing
 
see 
A/B testing
.
Startup
 is a temporary organization built to 
search
 for the answers to what
makes a repeatable and scalable 
business model
.
Take rate
 is the percentage of customers accepting (or taking) an up-sell/
next-sell offer.
Traffic
 is the measure of how many individuals visit a store or website. They
can arrive from paid media (i.e. Google, TV, or Facebook ads) or earned
media sources (public relations, referrals).
Up-Sell
 is a tactic used to grow existing customers. It tries to get customers
to buy more units or upgrade to a higher priced product to increase the
average order size. See 
Cross-Sell
.
Value Proposition
 describes the job being done for the customer. It includes
features that are solutions to customer problems or needs (productivity,
status, simplicity, convenience, etc.) for the customer segment(s). A value
proposition should match a startup’s 
customer segment
.
Viral Loop
 is the process of satisfied customers referring others to a
business, whether web, mobile or physical. It produces exponential increases
in customer/ users/traffic. See 
viral marketing
.
Viral Marketing
 are the marketing activities used to stimulate customers to
refer others to the business.
Waterfall Development
 is the engineering process used to develop products
(hardware, software or services) linearly, sequentially, with a stage-by-stage
method. The entire product and all features are specified up-front. Each
waterfall stage is assigned to a separate team to ensure greater project and
deadline control. Waterfall is the antithesis of 
Agile Development
.
Web/Mobile Channel
 is a sales and fulfillment channel using the Internet to
deliver messages and products to desktop, laptop, and mobile devices. Can
include websites, the cloud, phone app stores. See 
physical channel
.
Web/Mobile Product
 is a product made out of bits: social networks, video
games, mobile applications are examples. See 
physical product
.
Acknowledgements
I’
VE LIVED THREE LIVES
. M
Y FIRST CAREER STARTED
 in the Air Force during
the Vietnam War. Next, I spent over two decades as a Silicon Valley
technology entrepreneur. Now I’m into my second decade as an educator.
A few people changed my life at critical moments. In Thailand, John
Scoggins, my first boss, took me off a flight line full of fighter planes and
gunships and gave me part of the electronic warfare shop to run when I was
19. As an entrepreneur in my 20s and 30s, I was lucky to have four
extraordinary mentors, each brilliant in his field: Ben Wegbreit, who taught
me how to think; Gordon Bell, who taught me what to think about; Rob Van
Naarden, who taught me how to think about customers; and Allen Michels,
who taught me how to turn thinking into direct, immediate and outrageous
action.
My eight technology startups had me working with, around and near
some extraordinary people: Bill Perry, John Moussouris, John Hennessy,
Skip Stritter, Jon Rubenstein, Glen Miranker, Cleve Moler, Tom McMurray,
John Sanguinetti, Alvy Ray Smith, Chris Kryzan, Karen Dillon, Margaret
Hughes, Peter Barrett, Jim Wickett, Karen Richardson, Greg Walsh, John
McCaskey, and Roger Siboni. Some were active mentors, and others taught
me by osmosis.
Sitting on startup boards, I watched world-class entrepreneurs at work:
Steve Weinstein, Fred Amoroso, Fred Durham, Maheesh Jain, and Will
Harvey. And I got to see how smart and thoughtful venture investors helped
their companies solve problems: Kathryn Gould, Jon Feiber, Mike Maples,
Bill Davidow and many more. At General Electric, I watched Prescott Logan
use Customer Development to create a new Energy Storage division with the
agility of a startup inside a 100-year old company.
As a board member of IMVU, Will Harvey and Eric Ries were the first
corporate guinea pigs to implement the Customer Development process with
me. As the best student I ever had, Eric Ries had the valuable insight that
when Customer Development was combined with agile development, the
sum of two made a powerful concept he called the Lean Startup. (He also
named the feedback loop I drew between the customer validation and
discovery steps, calling it the “Pivot.”)
As one of Japan’s most innovative VCs, Takashi Tsutsumi thought the
Customer Development concepts so warranted adoption in Japan that he
personally translated 
The Four Steps
 and evangelized the concepts. Other
entrepreneurs followed with crowd-sourced translations into French, Russian,
Korean and Chinese. Brant Cooper and Patrick Vlaskovits extended my ideas
in their helpful book 
The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Customer Development
.
Alexander Osterwalder’s work about business model design and his book
Business Model Generation
 are a conceptual breakthroughs that I’ve adopted
as a way to “keep score” for the 
Customer Discovery process
. A big thanks
for his help. Dave McClure’s insights about demand creation for web/mobile
startup metrics inspired the web customer funnel discussions in several
places.
Before anyone took my ideas seriously, Jerry Engel at U.C. Berkeley’s
Haas Business School gave me my first forum for teaching Customer
Development. My first teaching partner, Rob Majteles, ensured that my
enthusiasm was matched by a coherent syllabus. At Stanford University’s
School of Engineering, Tom Byers, Tina Seelig and Kathy Eisenhardt were
gracious enough to invite me to teach with them in the Stanford Technology
Venture Program. They offered additional insights, encouragement, and
enough rope to hang myself when I created my Lean LaunchPad class, a new
way to teach entrepreneurship. A big thanks to the National Science
Foundation team including Errol Arkilic, Don Millard and Babu DasGupta,
for adopting the Lean LaunchPad class and Customer Development for their
Innovation Corps. And to Jon Feiber, Ann Miura Ko, John Burke, Jim
Hornthal, Alexander Osterwalder and Oren Jacob for teaching it with me.
Finally, Columbia Business School allowed me to offer the course to its
students in its joint MBA program with the U.C. Berkeley Haas School of
Business and invited me to teach in its short courses. I have learned
immeasurably from the thousands of students who sat through my classes as
unwitting victims of Customer Development while I experimented with new
ways to teach entrepreneurship. None of these classes would have worked
without the teaching assistants who kept the wheels on over the years, most
notably Ann Miura-Ko, Thomas Haymore, Bhavik Joshi, Christina Cacioppo,
and Eric Carr.
Besides the schools where I regularly lecture, other universities have
invited me to teach, lecture and learn. Big thanks to: Professor Cristobal
Garcia and the Pontificia Unversidad Catolica de Chile, in Santiago; Dave
Munsen, dean of engineering, and Thomas Zurburchen, associate dean of
entrepreneurship at the University of Michigan; Professor Nathan Furr of
Brigham Young University, who turned my notion of business model
competitions (instead of business plan competitions) into the first formal
contest; at Aalto University in Helsinki, Finland, Tuula Teeri, president, Will
Cardwell head of the Center for Entrepreneurship, and Kristo Ovaska and
Linda Liukas, who all welcomed me; and Professor Tom Eisenmann of
Harvard Business School’s Entrepreneurial Management Unit, with whom I
compare notes and teaching strategies in a semi-annual get-together.
Stephen Spinelli was at Babson when he was part of the team that taught
me how to teach entrepreneurship, and when he became president of
Philadelphia University, he gave me something I didn’t deserve. Carl
Schramm at the Kauffman Foundation turned into a friend in the pursuit of a
new way to think about entrepreneurial education.
Numerous authors have written extensively (and more coherently) about
each of the four steps of Customer Development I cover. A good many of the
building blocks of Customer Development were first articulated by Eric Von
Hippel (the Lead User), Rita Gunther McGrath and Ian MacMillan
(Discovery-driven Growth), Mary Sonnack, Michael J. Lanning, Michael
Bosworth (Solution Selling), and Thomas Freese, Neil Rackham, Mahan
Khalsa, Stephen Heiman, and Charles O’Reilly. Technology Life Cycle
Adoption was developed by Joe Bohlen, George Beal and Everett Rogers and
popularized by Geoffrey Moore. Market Type is an extension of the brilliant
work of Clayton Christensen. W. Chan Kim and Renee Mauborgne’s work on
Blue Ocean Strategy was a later influence on this edition of the book. A
formal process of dealing with the chaos and uncertainty of a startup (and the
company-building strategies) owes a tremendous amount to the theories of
John Boyd and the OODA Loop. Frank Robinson independently came up
with many of the concepts in the Customer Discovery and Validation long
before I wrote about them. Frank coined the term minimum viable product. I
liked it better than minimum feature set, which I used in the first book.
My partner and co-author, Bob Dorf, put up with more than any co-
author could imagine. His contribution is matched only by his patience. A
seasoned entrepreneur himself, Bob’s success as a serial entrepreneur and his
strengths in sales, marketing, and the Web have added immensely to our new
joint work. I met Bob when he walked into my E.piphany office. My startup
had five people aboard, and his had about a dozen. I bought his sales pitch,
and he helped me launch E.piphany’s customer development and promotion
efforts. In 2010 he practically moved into my ranch and became my partner
for the second time, helping to make 
The Startup Owner’s Manual
 a work
we’re both proud of. The “get/keep/grow” sections and “metrics that matter”
were his painful labor of love. Terri Vanech, our researcher/copyeditor, had
to deal with both of our unreasonable demands.
Thanks to our intrepid reviewers: Entrepreneurs Jake Levine at
News.me; Ross Gotler; Peter Leeds at 
Gabardine.com
; Steve Weinstein of
MovieLabs; Preston Bealle and Prescott Logan at GE’s Energy Storage
Technologies; venture capitalists Jon Feiber of MDV, Ann Miura-Ko at
Floodgate, John Burke from True Ventures, Mike Barlow of Cumulus
Partners, Takashi Tstusumi from Mitsui Sumitomo Ventures and Errol
Arkilic at the National Science Foundation. Their comments made the book
substantively better by imbuing it with their hundreds of years of collective
wisdom.
Finally, my wife Alison Elliott who not only put up with my obsession
with finding a methodology for early-stage startups and my passion for
teaching entrepreneurship, but also supported me with her wise counsel and
insight (along with numerous edits) which added clarity to my thinking. This
book would not have happened without her.
About the Authors
Steve Blank
A 
RETIRED EIGHT-TIME SERIAL ENTREPRENEUR
, Steve’s insight that startups
are not small versions of large companies is reshaping the way startups are
built and how entrepreneurship is taught. His observation that large
companies execute business models, but startups search for them, led him to
realize that startups need their own tools, different than those used to manage
existing companies.
Steve’s first tool for startups, the Customer Development methodology,
spawned the Lean Startup movement. The fundamentals of Customer
Development are detailed in Blank’s first book, 
The Four Steps to the
Epiphany
 (2003), which together with his blog, 
www.steveblank.com
, is
considered required reading among entrepreneurs, investors and established
companies throughout the world.
Blank teaches Customer Development and entrepreneurship at Stanford
University, U.C. Berkeley Haas Business School and Columbia University,
and his Customer Development process is taught at universities throughout
the world. In 2011, he developed the Lean LaunchPad, a hands-on class that
integrates Business Model design and Customer Development into practice
through fast-paced, real-world customer interaction and business model
iteration. In 2011, the National Science Foundation adopted Blank’s class for
its Innovation Corps (
I-Corps
), which trains teams of the nation’s top
scientists and engineers to take their ideas out of the university lab and into
the commercial marketplace.
Steve is a prolific writer and speaker who enjoys teaching young
entrepreneurs. In 2009, he earned the Stanford University Undergraduate
Teaching Award in Management Science and Engineering. In 2010, he
earned the Earl F. Cheit Outstanding Teaching Award at U.C. Berkeley Haas
School of Business. The 
San Jose Mercury News
 listed him as one of the 
10
Influencers in Silicon Valley
. Despite these accolades and many others, Steve
says he might well have been voted “least likely to succeed” in his New York
City high school class.
Eight Startups in 21 years
After repairing fighter plane electronics in Thailand during the Vietnam War,
Steve arrived in Silicon Valley in 1978, and joined his first of eight startups.
These included two semiconductor companies, Zilog and MIPS Computers;
Convergent Technologies; a consulting stint for Pixar; a supercomputer firm,
Ardent; peripheral supplier, SuperMac; a military intelligence systems
supplier, ESL; Rocket Science Games. Steve co-founded startup number
eight, E.piphany, in his living room in 1996. In sum: two significant
implosions, one massive “dot-com bubble” home run, several “base hits,” and
immense learning that resulted in 
The Four Steps to the Epiphany
.
An avid reader in history, technology, and entrepreneurship, Steve has
followed his curiosity about why entrepreneurship blossomed in Silicon
Valley while stillborn elsewhere. It has made him an unofficial expert and
frequent speaker on 
“The Secret History of Silicon Valley.”
In his spare time, Blank is a Commissioner of the California Coastal
Commission, the public body which regulates land use and public access on
the California coast. Steve served on the boards of Audubon California, the
Peninsula Open Space Land Trust (POST), and was a trustee of U.C. Santa
Cruz and a Director of the California League of Conservation Voters
(CLCV). Steve’s proudest startups are daughters Katie and Sarah, co-
developed with wife Alison Elliott.
Bob Dorf
B
OB
 D
ORF FOUNDED HIS FIRST SUCCESS AT AGE
 22
 and, since then, six more
—“two homeruns, two base hits, and three great tax losses in all,” as he puts
it. He’s advised and/or invested in at least a score more startups since. Dorf is
often called the “midwife of Customer Development,” having been among
the first to help Steve Blank deploy it when Steve’s eighth startup, E.piphany,
opened its doors with five employees in 1996. Bob’s sixth startup, Marketing
1to1, helped E.piphany engage its very first customers. He later critiqued the
early versions of Steve’s 
Four Steps to the Epiphany
 mercilessly along the
way, and they’ve been friends and colleagues ever since.
When Bob and Steve aren’t writing, Bob runs the K&S Ranch
consultancy. Bob’s deep experience consulting to 
Fortune 500
 companies
and in online marketing balance Steve’s VC and software-centric experience.
Bob teaches a full-semester course at Columbia Business School,
“Introduction to Venturing,” on Customer Development and getting startups
right.
Entrepreneurial from the age of 12, Bob received his last W-2 almost 40
years ago, when he quit his editor’s job at New York’s WINS Radio to
launch his first startup. Dorf+Stanton Communications, founded in his living
room, grew from a staff of two—Bob and a St. Bernard—to 150+, when Bob
sold it in 1989. He’s counseled dozens of nonprofits probono on “donor
development,” as well.
Bob co-founded Marketing 1to1 (later Peppers & Rogers Group), an
early CRM strategy firm, and drove its growth to 400+ people worldwide. As
founding CEO, Dorf spearheaded major strategic customer programs at a
veritable “who’s who” of companies including 3M, Bertelsmann, Ford, HP,
Jaguar, NCR, Oracle, and Schwab. He’s spoken before scores of U.S. and
international audiences, and published dozens of articles including an indepth
Harvard 
Business Review
 treatise.
Dorf lives in Stamford, Connecticut, with his wife Fran, a therapist and
thrice-published novelist. His proudest startup by far is daughter Rachel, a
psychologist who recently co-founded Bob’s first grandchild, Maya Rose
Gotler.
It’s not the beginning of the end, but it is perhaps the
end of the beginning