Lean and Green
First employment agency with a Lean and Green Personal Mobility Award: Otto Workforce, November 2012 
Lean and Green
Lean and Green is a fast expanding community of more than 300 companies, 
municipalities and institutions. Their vision is that improving the sustainabilityof their transportation processes will improve their competitiveness. Setting atarget of reducing their CO
2emissions by more than 20% in 5 years has proven
to kickstart a cycle of continuous improvement, leading to increased customervalue and reduced costs.
Sustainability drives
competitiveness Lean and Green
Lean and Green Logistics Award
Members get admitted when they are able to show
an audited plan to reduce their CO2emissions by 
at least 20% in five years’ time. From that momenton they are permitted to carry the Lean and GreenAward. When the objective in the plan of action isachieved the member will be awarded its first Leanand Green Star. The next levels of Lean and GreenStars focus on improvement by absolute comparisonsbetween members, and innovations in co-operationin the total supply chain.
Lean and Green in other sectors
The success of Lean and Green in logistics attractedmembers from other sectors, such as personal transportation (Personal Mobility) and tools to improve processes (Solutions). Special temporaryfocus areas are chosen to accelerate the develop-ment, such as Lean and Green Barge and Lean andGreen Municipalities. 
Lean and Green Barge
A new trend in business collaboration is thebundling of container flows by shippers to allow for new inland shipping concepts, in short Lean and Green Barge. Lean and Green Barge stimulatesregional collaboration of shipping companies inorder to make better use of the waterways whileefficiently accommodating the increasing containerflows. The initiative is supported by the IDVV Program (Improved Utilization of Waterways).
Cuijk - Rotterdam
         
          
        
 
Leeuwarden - RotterdamEmmerich (D.) - RotterdamWillebroek (B.) - Zaandam Veghel - RotterdamLean and Green
Fred Hooft
Logistics Manager Bavaria
“It is so important to combine
all the volumes. Even when youthink your volume isn’t of anyimportance. Many small volumescombined can eventually make
up a large volume. There’s a lot more possiblethan you might think.” 
2The number of Lean and Green Barge lanes has grown
to five. There are more to come.
Lean and Green
Lean and Green Municipalities
The challenge for modern municipalities is to 
improve the vitality of the city and the quality of life for its citizens. A sustainable supply chainfor city distribution should therefore reduce thenumber of movements by delivery trucks as muchas possible, reduce the emissions produced bythese movements and position these movementsat the time of day and locations where theinconvenience is at a minimum level. 
Connekt’s Lean and Green Municipalities team
assists municipalities in developing plans for improvement together with their shop-keepers, thetransporters and the freighters, as no single partycan manage the improvement on its own. The plansconsist of a wide range of actions, from simple actions to reviewing current regulations, to innovative concepts like tendering the city centredistribution for most shops to one single transporterwho uses special emission free trucks. Municipalitieswith a good and well-balanced plan receive a Leanand Green Award.
Lean and Green International
Lean and Green does not stop at the border. Italy,Belgium and Germany have already started theirown Lean and Green Chapters, in close co-operationwith Connekt. Other European countries - Sweden, Spain, UK - 
are preparing their Lean and Green launch. The internationalization of Lean and Green does not only enable companies in other countries to achievetheir sustainability targets. It also provides all Leanand Green Winners with the opportunity to expandtheir networks and start new & sustainable collaborations.
Lean and Green initiative
Lean and Green is an independent organization led by Connekt, a Dutch public-private network for sustainable mobility. The Lean and Green Program was instigated by the Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment. More than 300public and private organizations in the Dutch logistics sector - shipping companies, haulersand councils - already participate in the Connekt/Lean and Green network.
Tom Tillemans
European Head of Logistics Network 
Development H.J. Heinz and
Ambassador Lean and Green: “A platform like Lean and Greencreates a maximum fly-wheel effect by bringing together motivated parties. It also makes
both the tools and the results publicly accessible.”
3
Lean and Green
Contact Lean and Green (Connekt)
Harsha Dijk
Program Manager Lean and Green (NL)dijk@connekt.nlT +31 (0)15 251 65 65www.lean-green.nl orwww.connekt.nl 
4