Your life. our inspiration.
 9000421703 Rev A 01/09DISHWASHER USE AND CARE MANUAL
MoDel: sHe4aM, sHe5aM, sHX3aM, sHe5al, sHX5al, sHX6ap
 
GUIDE D’ENTRETIEN ET D’UTILISATION DU LAVE-VAISSELLE 
MoDel: sHe4aM, sHe5aM, sHX3aM, sHe5al, sHX5al, sHX6ap 
MANUAL DE USO Y CUIDADO PARA LAVADORA DE PLATOS 
MoDel: sHe4aM, sHe5aM, sHX3aM, sHe5al, sHX5al, sHX6ap
2Congratulations, and thank You from Bosch!
thank you for selecting a Bosch dishwasher. You have joined the many consumers who demand quiet and superior performance from their 
dishwashers.
this manual was written with your safety and convenience in mind, and the information contained herein is very important. We highly 
recommend that you read this manual before you use your dishwasher for the first time.
to learn even more about your dishwasher and available accessories, as well as many other top-quality Bosch appliances, visit our website at  
www.boschappliances.com.
please contact us if you have any questions or comments. Call 1-800-944-2904 , or write to:
BsH Home appliances, Corp.
5551 Mcf adden a venue
Huntington Beach, C a 92649
enjoy!
IMPORTANT SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS  ..................................................................................................................................................... 3
Dishwasher Components ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4
Dishwasher f eatures and options ........................................................................................................................................................ 4-5
Dishware Materials ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6
preparing and loading the Dishware ................................................................................................................................................... 6-8
 Dishware preparation  ..................................................................................................................................................................... 6
 loading the Dishwasher ............................................................................................................................................................... 6-8
adding Detergent and rinse a gent .................................................................................................................................................... 9-10
Wash Cycles  and options ..................................................................................................................................................................... 10
operating the Dishwasher ............................................................................................................................................................... 11-13
 operating the sHX3aM ................................................................................................................................................................. 11
 operating the sHe5aM ................................................................................................................................................................. 12
 operating the sHe4aM ................................................................................................................................................................. 13
Care and Maintenance .................................................................................................................................................................... 14-16
Detailed Wash Cycle information/sanitized ........................................................................................................................................... 16
self Help ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 17-19
Customer service ................................................................................................................................................................................. 20
statement of Warranties ....................................................................................................................................................................... 21
3NOTICE
Never use steam cleaning products to clean your dishwasher. The manufacturer will not be liable for possible damages or conse -
quences.
Never use harsh chemicals to clean your dishwasher. Some chloride-containing cleaning products can damage your dishwasher 
and may present health hazards!
It is highly recommended for the end use consumer to become familiar with the procedure to shut off the incoming water supply 
and the procedure to shut off the incoming power supply. See the Installation Instructions or speak with your installer for more 
information.
WARNING
Misuse of the dishwasher can result in serious injury or death. Do not use the dishwasher in any way not covered in this manual or for any purpose other than those explained on the following pages. 
Severe product damage and/or injury could result from the use of unqualified service technicians or non-original replacement parts. 
All repairs must be performed by a qualified service technician using only original equipment factory replacement parts. 
Electrical shock or fire could result if the electrical supply for the dishwasher covered in this manual is incorrectly installed or if the 
dishwasher has been improperly grounded.  Do not use the dishwasher covered in this manual if you are not certain the electrical 
supply has been correctly installed or the dishwasher has been properly grounded. 
WARNING: To reduce the risk of fire, electrical shock, or serious injury, observe 
the following:Important Safety Instructions - Save This Information
• this appliance must be grounded to a metal, permanent wir -
ing system, or an equipment grounding conductor must be 
run with the circuit conductors and connected to the equip-
ment grounding terminal or lead on the dishwasher. see the 
Installation Instructions  included with this dishwasher for 
more information on electrical requirements.
• Use this dishwasher only for its intended function, which is 
the washing of household dishware and kitchenware.
• This dishwasher is provided with  Installation Instructions  
and this Use and Care Manual. read and understand all 
instructions before using the dishwasher.
• Use only detergents or rinsing agents recommended for use in 
a dishwasher, and keep them out of the reach of children.
• When loading items to be washed:
  -  locate sharp items so that they are not likely to damage 
the door seal.
  -  load knives and other sharp utensils with their H anDles 
up to reduce the risk of cut-type injuries.
• Do not wash plastic items unless they are marked “dishwasher 
safe” or the equivalent. for plastic items not so marked, check 
the manufacturer’s recommendations.
• Do not operate your dishwasher unless all enclosure panels are in place.
• Do not tamper with or override controls and interlocks.• Do not abuse, sit on, or stand on the door or dish racks of the dishwasher.
• To reduce the risk of injury, do not allow children to play in or on the dishwasher.
• When children become old enough to operate the appliance, 
it is the legal responsibility of the parents or legal guardians to 
ensure that they are instructed in safe practices by qualified persons.
•  Under certain conditions, hydrogen gas may be produced in a hot water system that has not been used for two weeks or more. Hydrogen gas is explosive. Before using a dishwasher 
that is connected to a hot water system that has been unused 
for two weeks or longer, turn on all hot water faucets and let the water flow from each for several minutes. This will release 
any accumulated hydrogen gas.  as the gas is explosive, do 
not smoke or use an open flame during this time.
•  Remove the door to the washing compartment when remov -
ing an old dishwasher from service or discarding.
•  To avoid floor damage and possible mold growth, do not allow 
wet areas to remain around or under the dishwasher.
•  Protect your dishwasher from the elements. Protect against freezing to avoid possible damage to the fill valve. Damage caused by freezing is not covered by the warranty.
•  When you dispose your old appliance make sure you remove the door or disable the latch.
4
Dishwasher Components
Top Rack  
Spray Arm
Bottom RackBottom Rack 
Spray Arm
Detergent 
DispenserModel/Serial Number LabelSilverware BasketTop RackVent
 Filter System
(in dishwasher 
floor)
Rinse Agent 
Dispenser
Dishwasher Features and Options
Noise Reduction System: a two-pump motor system, the suspension Motor™, and insulation make this dishwasher one of 
the quietest in north america.
Nylon Coated Racks: Eliminate cuts and nicks, and have a five-year warranty.
Flow-Through Heater™: Heats water to a temperature of up to 160°f . 
Condensation Drying: A high temperature final rinse, a low temperature stainless steel tub, and the sheeting action of a 
rinse agent result in drying that is hygienic, energy efficient, and economical.
Triple Filtration System: Three filters ensure distribution of clean water and protect the main pump and the drain pump 
from foreign material.
Door Gasket
5Model n umber
SHE5AMSHX3AM
Control Panel  
Design
Audible Cycle  
Completion Signal
Clean Light
Refill Rinse Agent 
Indicator Light
Sanitize Light
Upper Rack  
Flip Tines
Height Adjustable  
Upper RackHidden t op  
ControlHidden t op  
ControlHidden t op  
ControlHidden t op  
Controlexposed  
front  
Control
no
yes no
yes yes
yes yes
no yesyes yes
Child Lock Button 
Suspension no yesDishwasher Features and Options
Silverware 
Basketstandard flexible flexibleexposed  
front  
Control
no
yes
yesyes
yes SHE4AM02
yes
standard
no
SHE4AM12
SHE5AL
SHX5AL
SHX6AP
exposed  
front  
Control
no no
yes yes yes yesyes yes
yes yes yes yes
yes yes
yes yes yesyes yes
yes
yes yesyes yes
standard standard standardLower Rack  
Flip Tines no yes no no no no no
no no
Time Remaining
Indicator no no no no no nono no
yes
OPTIDRYTMno no no no no no yesExtra Dry Heat yes yes yes yesHalf Loadno no yes yes
yes yes yesyes yes yesyes
6Dishware Materials
NOTE: Before using your dishwasher for the first time, check the information in this section. 
some items are not dishwasher safe and should be hand-washed; others require special loading. 
Contact the item’s manufacturer if you are unsure about the item’s dishwasher suitability.
Recommended
Aluminum:  Colored anodized aluminum may fade over time. Minerals in your water may 
cause the aluminum to darken or spot. This can usually be removed by using a soap-filled steel  
wool pad.
China, Crystal, Stoneware: some hand-painted pieces may discolor, fade, or spot. Hand-
wash these pieces. position fragile glassware so that it will not topple over or contact other 
pieces during the wash cycle.
Glass:  Milk glass may yellow.
Non-Stick Coatings:  apply a light coating of vegetable oil to non-stick surfaces after 
drying.
Plastics:  Make sure the piece is dishwasher safe.
Stainless Steel, Sterling Silver, and Silver Plate: place these pieces so that they do not 
contact dissimilar metals.
Not Recommended
Acrylic:  Crazing (small cracks throughout the acrylic) may occur.
Adhesive-Joined Pieces: adhesives that join materials such as plastic, wood, bone, steel 
copper, tin, etc. may loosen.Bone-Handled Utensils: Handles may separate.
Iron:  iron will rust. Hand-wash and dry immediately.
Non-Dishware Items:  Your dishwasher is intended for use in cleaning onl Y standard 
household dishware and kitchenware.Pewter, Brass, Bronze: p ewter will tarnish. Hand-wash and dry immediately.
Tin: tin will rust. Hand-wash and dry immediately.
Wood:  Wooden bowls, wooden utensils, and wood-handled utensils can crack, warp, and 
lose their finish.
Preparing and Loading the Dishware
Dishware Preparation
Do not pre-wash items having loosely-attached soiling. remove large food particles, bones, 
seeds, toothpicks, and excessive grease. items having burned-on, baked-on or starchy soils 
may require pre-treatment.
Loading the Dishwasher 
Check the Materials section of this manual if you are unsure about an item’s dishwasher 
suitability.
load only dishwasher-safe items into the dishwasher. load dishes in the dishwasher racks so 
that the insides of bowls, pots, and pans are face downwards. avoid nesting and contact points 
between dishes. separate items of dissimilar metals.
Loading the Top Rack
figures 1 and 2 show typical 10 and 12 place load patterns for the top rack. 
NOTE: Make sure items do not protrude through the bottom of the racks and block the spray 
arms.
 NOTICE
To avoid dishwasher damage, do not load the dishwasher with objects such as paper 
products, plastic bags, packing materials, or anything other than normal dishware and 
kitchenware.Figure 1
Figure 2
12 place setting top rack 10 place setting top rack 

7
Figure 5
Figure 6
Do not load the dishwasher with anything other than dishwasher-safe dishware and 
kitchenware.
Top Rack Accessories
Top Rack Flip Tines
flip tines fold down to make loading the racks easier in some instances. Grasp the tines, 
release from notch, and fold the tines downward. When the top rack is loaded, push it into 
the dishwasher.
NOTE:  When pushing the top rack into the dishwasher, push it until it stops against the back 
of the tub so the top rack spray arm will connect to the water supply in the rear of the tub. 
Do not push the top rack with the door.
Rack Height Adjustment (select models)
remove the empty rack by pulling it out of the dishwasher to the point that it can be lifted 
upward, as shown in figure 5. pull the rack outward and up until the rollers are completely 
free of the roller guides. re-insert the rack with the other set of rollers on the roller guides, 
as shown in f igure 6.
Loading the Bottom Rack
place large items in the bottom rack. load pots, pans and bowls upside-down. figures 3 and 
4 show typical mixed loads for the bottom rack. Do not block the vent at left side of tub (see figure 7)
Bottom Rack Flip Tines
flip tines fold down to make loading the racks easier in some instances. Grasp the tines and 
fold them downward. Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 710 place setting bottom rack 
12 place setting bottom rack 
Do not block vent.
8Loading the Silverware Basket
NOTE: the silverware basket tops can be folded up to accommodate large or oddly-shaped items. 
With the silverware basket tops down, load the silverware basket following the patterns suggested in figures 8 (for standard basket) and 
9 (for flexible basket). Place knives with their handles up, and forks and spoons with their handles down. 
if large or oddly-shaped items are to be loaded into the silverware basket with the tops up, load the items so that they do not nest together. 
load knives and sharp utensils with their handles up.
 CAUTION  
The sharp points and edges of knives and other sharp utensils can cause serious injuries.  Load knives and other sharp utensils with 
sharp points and edges down. Do not allow children to handle or play near knives and sharp utensils.
The Standard Silverware Basket
This basket fits in the front-middle of the lower rack.
The Flexible Silverware Basket
this basket is designed for maximum versatility. the basket splits along its length, resulting in two halves that may be placed in a variety 
of positions in the lower rack, greatly increasing the lower rack’s loading versatility.  
To split the Flexible Silverware Basket:
1. Grasp the basket as shown in f igure 10a , and slide the two halves in opposite directions, as shown in f igure 10a .
2.  pull the two halves apart, as shown in f igure 10B.
some suggestions for placing the two halves in the lower rack are shown in f igure 11.
Figure 11
Figure 8
12 place setting 
(select Models)4
5
5
5 1 1
1 1
1
1
1
111
1
15
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
22
2
2
2
2
2
5
5
5
5
5
5
4 4
43 3
3 333 3 3 6
3
3 344 4 4 4
44 43
67Figure 9
12 place setting 
(select Models )Figure 10
a
B5 4 3
5 3
5 3
5 3
5 3
5 33
42 11 2 3 4 5
2 1
2 1
6
7 6
2 1
2 1
2 15
3 5
3 5
3 5
3 5
3 567
4
4
4
41
1
1
1
1
12
2
2
2
2
24
4
4
4
4
4543
53
53
33
21
1
16
535
35
354
4
41
1
12
4
4
4 422
22
22
22
221
1
11
1
153
55
4 4
3 367 4
55
34
9
Wash 
Cycle
Power 
Scrub 
Plus
Regular 
WashTable 1 - Recommended Detergent Amount
 Hard Medium Soft
45 25-45Unit
ml
mlTbsp
Tbsp45
25-45 25 15-253 3 1.75 to 3
1.75 to 3 1.75 1 to 1.75Water Type
Quick 
Wash/ 
Delicate 
Economyml
Tbsp25 15-25 15
1.75 1 to 1.75 1
Rinse &  
Hold none none noneAdding Detergent and Rinse Agent
Detergent
Use only detergent specifically designed for dishwashers. For best results, use fresh powdered 
dishwashing detergent.
NOTICE  
To avoid dishwasher damage, do not use hand dishwashing products in your dish -
washer.  
this dishwasher uses less water so you need to use less detergent. With soft water, 1 tablespoon 
(15ml) of detergent will clean most loads. the detergent dispenser cup has lines that measure 
detergent to 1 tablespoon (15ml)  and 1.75 tablespoons (25ml). 3 tablespoons (45ml) of 
detergent will completely fill the detergent dispenser cup.
NOTICE  
To avoid dishware damage, do not use too much detergent if your water supply is soft. 
Using too much detergent in soft water may cause etching in glassware. 
NOTE: if you do not know the hardness of your water supply, use 15ml of detergent. increase 
the amount of detergent, if necessary, to the least amount required to get your dishware and 
kitchenware clean.  
use the measuring lines in the detergent dispenser cup as a guide to measure the amount of 
detergent recommended in t able 1.Figure 12
• use fresh powdered deter -
gent for best results
• 1 tablespoon will clean 
most loads
• 3 tablespoons Max, do not overfill
• When using detergent tabs, lay  them flat to avoid 
contact with the coverAdd Detergent
Figure 15
• add rinse a gent 
when the light 
on the control panel illuminates
•  lift tab to open        
 Always use Rinse Agent  
even if your detergent con-tains rinse a gentTo closeFigure 13
Figure 16
•to add rinse 
agent pour in 
the oval• push button Figure 14
To open the cover
Filling the Detergent Dispenser
fill the dispenser cup as recommend in table 1. ( see figure 12 for additional 
information.)
To close, place finger as shown in Figure 13, slide forward, then press down until you hear 
a *click*.
to open the detergent dispenser cover, press the gray release tab as shown in f igure 14. 
Adding Rinse Agents
to achieve proper drying, always use a liquid rinse agent, even if your detergent contains 
a rinse agent or drying additive.Auto
Washml
Tbsp25-45 25 15-25
1.75 to 3 1.75 1 to 1.753 TBS MAX 
2 TBS (25 ML)  
1 TBS (15 ML)  
Place finger as 
shown above, slide 
forward, then press 
down firMl Y until 
you hear    CliCK• 
To add Rinse Agent
10x SHE5AM
xxRinse Agent Dispenser
open the rinse agent dispenser by lifting the tab with your thumb.
NOTE: the dishwasher indicates low rinse agent either by showing the symbol   in the 
countdown display, or illuminating the refill rinse agent light (model dependent).
add liquid rinse agent to the dispenser as shown in figure 16 until the rinse agent reservoir 
is full. Wipe up any excess rinse agent that puddles when the dispenser reservoir is full.
NOTE: After filling the rinse agent dispenser, the  indicator light will go out in a few minutes 
after the dishwasher door is shut (select models only).
Wash Cycles (See Cycle Chart)
always make sure your dishware is dishwasher safe. refer to the Dishware Materials section of this manual for guidance.
Power Scrub Plus
Cleans items having baked-on or hard dried-on food soils. these items may require soaking or hand scouring.
Auto Wash 
Cleans large loads with loosely attached food soils.
Regular
thoroughly cleans large loads having loosely attached normal soiling.
Delicate/Economy
for delicate or heirloom dishwasher and silverware or other special items. always make sure 
that the items are dishwasher safe. refer to the Materials section of this manual for further 
information. Hand washing may be the best treatment of such items.
Quick Wash 
for lightly soiled items with easy to remove food soils.
Rinse and Hold
allows you to rinse the food soil off of a partial load and hold them in the dishwasher until there is a full load.
Dishware Drying  
at the end of the cycle the dishwasher will stop and a period of condensation drying will follow.  
Wash Cycle Options
OPTIDRYTM  
this feature senses when the unit is low on rinse agent and automatically increases the 
drying time. for best performance, always use a liquid rinse agent even if your detergent 
contains a drying additive.
Half Load
in the power scrub plus, regular, auto wash and Delicate/economy cycles you can reduce 
the energy and water consumption when washing small, lightly soiled loads that fill 
approximately half of the dishwasher’s capacity. to activate, select the Half load button in 
addition to p ower scrub plus, regular, a uto wash or  Delicate/economy cycle.
Delay Start
this option allows you to delay the start time of your dishwasher. 
Sanitized Light
When the sanitized light appears, it means that the dishware and kitchenware that was 
just washed has been sanitized according to the requirements of the national sanitation 
Foundation (NSF). For more information on NSF certification, refer to the Wash Cycle 
information section of this manual. 
Unloading the Dishwasher
Unload the bottom rack first. Unload the silverware basket(s). They are easily removed for 
unloading. u nload the top rack.
Delicate / Econo
Rinse and HoldRegularAuto WashPower Scrub Plus
Quick WashWash Cycles
x
xx
x
x
xx
xx
x
xxx x x xx SHX3AM
SHE4AM0 x x
x
x
xx
x
xx x SHE4AM1
SHE5AL
SHX5AL
SHX6APxx
11 WARNING  
You could be seriously scalded if you allow hot water to splash 
out of the dishwasher. OPEN THE DOOR CAREFULLY during any 
wash or rinse cycle. Do not fully open the door until water noises have stopped.
To Start Unit:
•  Door must be open. Press the “ON/OFF” button to turn the unit on.
•  One of the Wash Cycle Indicator Lights will be flashing to show 
you are in the Wash Cycle selection mode.
•  Press the “<” or “>” button to select the desired wash cycle. •  Press the “START” button (Wash Cycle Indicator Light will stop 
flashing)
•  Close the door to start the cyclenote: rinse agent indicator light will be illuminated if the unit 
needs rinse a gent.
note: if you close the door without pressing the start button the 
unit will beep.
To Cancel the Cycle:
•  Open the door just far enough to expose the controls. Be careful 
of water splash out!
•  Press and hold the “START/RESET” button until the “Active” Indica-
tor light goes out.
•  Close the door and wait for about 1 minute for the dishwasher 
to drain.
•  Open the door and press the “ON/OFF” button. •  You are now ready to start a new cycle.
Setting Options (Rinse Agent Amount / Extra Dry Heat 
Activation / Cycle Completion Signal Tone Level) 
•  Door must be open. Press the “ON/OFF” button to turn the unit 
on.
•  One of the Wash Cycle Indicator Lights will be flashing to show 
you are in the Wash Cycle selection mode.
•  To enter the Options Setup Mode, press and hold down the “>” 
button, then press and release the “START RESET” button, then  
release the “>” button.
•  The “Clean” Indicator Light and at least one addition Indicator Light 
will be flashing to show you are in the Options Setup Mode.
•  Press the “>” button to select the option you would like to ad-
just.
  o  If the “CLEAN” and “RINSE AGENT” Indicator Lights are flashing 
you are ready to set the amount of rinse agent the unit will 
dispense.
  o  If the “CLEAN” and “SANITIZED” Indicator Lights are flashing you 
are ready to turn your extra Dry Heat option on/off.
  o  If the “CLEAN” and “SANITIZED” and “RINSE AGENT” Indicator 
Lights are flashing you are ready to set the Cycle Completion 
signal t one level.To Set the Amount of Rinse Agent Dispensed
note : if your glasses have spots you need more rinse agent. if your 
glasses have streaks you need less rinse a gent.
•  With the “CLEAN” and “RINSE AGENT” Indicator Lights flashing.
•  Press the “<” button to change the amount of Rinse Agent Dis-
pensed.
•  As you press the “<” button you will notice the Wash Cycle Indica-
tor lights illuminating.
■   if none of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, 
the rinse a gent Dispenser is turned off.
■  if one of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
rinse agent Dispenser is set to deliver the lowest charge of rinse 
agent.
■   if two of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
rinse agent Dispenser is set to deliver a medium charge of rinse 
agent.
■    if three of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the rinse 
agent Dispenser is set to deliver the largest charge of rinse agent.  
•  Press “START” to save your settings.
To Turn the Extra Dry Heat On or Off
•  With the “CLEAN” and “SANTITIZED” Indicator Lights flashing.•  Press the “<” button to change the Extra Dry Heat setting.•  As you press the “<” button you will notice the Wash Cycle Indica-
tor lights illuminating.
o  if none of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
extra Dry Heat option is turned off.
o  if one of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
extra Dry Heat is turned on.
•  Press “START” to save your settings.
To Set the Cycle Completion Signal Tone Level
•  With the “CLEAN” and “SANITIZED” and “RINSE AGENT” Indicator 
Lights flashing.
•  Press the “<” button to change the Cycle Completion Signal Tone 
level.
•  As you press the “<” button you will notice the Wash Cycle Indi-
cator lights illuminating and the Cycle Completion signal tone 
level changing. 
o  if none of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, there 
will be no tone. the Cycle Completion signal is turned off.
o  if one of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, there 
will be a low Cycle Completion signal t one level. 
o  if two of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, there 
will be a medium Cycle Completion signal t one level. 
o  if three of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, you 
will be at the maximum Cycle Completion signal t one level. 
•  Press “START” to save your settings.OPERATING THE SHX3AM, SHX5AL, & SHX6AP
12OPERATING THE SHE5AM & SHE5AL
 WARNING  
You could be seriously scalded if you allow hot water to splash 
out of the dishwasher. OPEN THE DOOR CAREFULLY during any 
wash or rinse cycle. Do not fully open the door until water noises have stopped.
To Start Unit:
•  Door must be closed. Press the “ON/OFF” button to turn the unit 
on.
•  The Countdown Display and one of the Wash Cycle Indicator 
Lights will be flashing to show you are in the Wash Cycle selec-
tion mode.
•  Press the “<” or “>” button to select the desired wash cycle.
•  If desired select the “HALF LOAD” or DELAY START” features at 
this point.
o  in addition to your Wash Cycle selection, for small loads of 
lightly soiled dishes press the “HALF LOAD” button. This will 
save energy, water.
o  if you would like to delay the start time of the dishwasher press 
the “DELAY” button until the desired delay time (1-24 hrs.) shows in the Countdown Display window. 
•  Press the “START” button to begin the cycle (Wash Cycle Indicator 
Light will stop flashing)
note: rinse agent indicator light will be illuminated if the unit needs 
rinse a gent.
Child Lock
•  After pressing the “START” button you can activate the Child Lock 
feature.
•  Press and hold down the “<” button until “CL” appears in the 
Countdown Display window. now any button you press (except 
ON/OFF) will not function and “CL” will display each time.
•  To deactivate, press and hold the “<” button until the “CL” disap-
pears from the Countdown Display window.  
To Cancel the Cycle:
•  Press and hold the “START/RESET” button until the Countdown 
Display reads “0:01”.
•  Wait until the Countdown Display reads “0:00” and turn the unit 
off. 
•  You are now ready to start a new cycle.note: You cannot cancel a cycle with the Child lock feature 
activated.
Setting Options (Rinse Agent Amount / Extra Dry Heat 
Activation) 
•  Door must be closed. Press the “ON/OFF” button to turn the unit 
on.
•  One of the Wash Cycle Indicator Lights will be flashing to show 
you are in the Wash Cycle selection mode.
•  To enter the Options Setup Mode, press and hold down the “>” 
button, then press and release the “START RESET” button, then 
release the “>” button.
•  The “Sanitized” Indicator Light will be flashing to show you are in 
the options setup Mode.
•  Press the “>” button to select the option you would like to ad-
just
o  If the Countdown Display shows a “d:00” or “d:01” are ready to 
turn your extra Dry Heat option on/off.
o  If the Countdown Display shows a “r:00” through “r:06” you 
are ready to set the amount of rinse agent the unit will dis-
pense.
To Turn the Extra Dry Heat On or Off
•  With the Countdown Display showing a “d:00” or “d:01” press the 
“<” button to change the setting.
o  “d:00” means the Extra Dry Heat is off.
o  “d:01” means the Extra Dry Heat is on
•  Press “START” to save your settings.
To Set the Amount of Rinse Agent Dispensed
note : if your glasses have spots you need more rinse agent. if your 
glasses have streaks you need less rinse a gent.
•  With the Countdown Display showing “r:00” through “r:06” 
(r:00 = no rinse aid & r:06 = highest rinse aid) press the “<” 
button to change the amount of rinse a gent the unit will 
dispense.
•  Press “START” to save your settings.

13 WARNING  
You could be seriously scalded if you allow hot water to splash 
out of the dishwasher. OPEN THE DOOR CAREFULLY during any 
wash or rinse cycle. Do not fully open the door until water noises have stopped.
To Start Unit:
•  Door must be closed. Press the “ON/OFF” button to turn the unit 
on.
•  One of the Wash Cycle Indicator Lights will be flashing to show 
you are in the Wash Cycle selection mode.
•  Press the “<” or “>” button to select the desired wash cycle. 
•  If desired select the “HALF LOAD” or DELAY START” features at 
this point.
o    if you would like to delay the start time of the dishwasher press 
the “DELAY” button until the desired delay time (3/6/9 hrs.) 
shows on the indicator lights.
o  in addition to your Wash Cycle selection, for small loads of 
lightly soiled dishes press the “HALF LOAD” button. This will save energy and water (sHe4aM1# only).
•  Press the “START” button to begin the cycle (Wash Cycle Indica-
tor Light will stop flashing and the “Active” Indicator Light will illuminate)
note: rinse agent indicator light will be illuminated if the unit needs 
rinse a gent.
Child Lock
•  After pressing the “START” button you can activate the Child Lock 
feature.
•  Press and hold down the “<” button until Child Lock Indicator Light 
illuminates (light goes out when button is released). 
•  Now any button you press (except ON/OFF) will not function and 
the Child lock indicator light illuminates when pressing.
•  To deactivate, press and hold the “<” button until the Child Lock 
indicator light goes out.  
To Cancel the Cycle:
•  Press and hold the “START/RESET” button until the “Active” Indica-
tor light goes out.
•  Wait for about 1 minute for the dishwasher to drain.
•  Press the “ON/OFF” button. •  You are now ready to start a new 
cycle
note: You cannot cancel a cycle with the 
Child lock feature activated.
Setting Options (Rinse Agent 
Amount / Extra Dry Heat Activa-tion) 
•  Door must be closed. Press the “ON/
off” button to turn the unit on.
•  One of the Wash Cycle Indicator Lights 
will be flashing to show you are in the Wash Cycle selection mode.
•  To enter the Options Setup Mode, 
press and hold down the “>” button, 
then press and release the “START RE-
SET” button, then release the “>” button.
•  The “Clean” Indicator Light and at least one addition Indicator Light 
will be flashing to show you are in the Options Setup Mode.
•  Press the “>” button to select the option you would like to adjust
o  If the “CLEAN” and “RINSE AGENT” Indicator Lights are flashing 
you are ready to set the amount of rinse agent the unit will 
dispense.
o  If the “CLEAN” and “SANITIZED” Indicator Lights are flashing you 
are ready to turn your extra Dry Heat option on/off.
To Set the Amount of Rinse Agent Dispensed
note: if your glasses have spots you need more rinse agent. if your 
glasses have streaks you need less rinse a gent.
•  With the “CLEAN” and “RINSE AGENT” Indicator Lights flashing.
•  Press the “<” button to change the amount of Rinse Agent Dis-
pensed.
•  As you press the “<” button you will notice the Wash Cycle Indica-
tor lights illuminating
o  if none of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
rinse a gent Dispenser is turned off.
o  if one of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
rinse agent Dispenser is set to deliver the lowest charge of 
rinse a gent.
o  if two of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
rinse agent Dispenser is set to deliver a medium charge of 
rinse a gent.
o  if three of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
rinse agent Dispenser is set to deliver the largest charge of 
rinse a gent.
•  Press “START” to save your settings.
To Turn the Extra Dry Heat On or Off
•  With the “CLEAN” and “SANTITIZED” Indicator Lights flashing.•  Press the “<” button to change the Extra Dry Heat setting.•  As you press the “<” button you will notice the Wash Cycle Indica-
tor lights illuminating
o  if none of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
extra Dry Heat option is turned off.
o  if one of the Wash Cycle indicator lights are illuminated, the 
extra Dry Heat is turned on.
•  Press “START” to save your settings.
SHE4AM1OPERATING THE:  
SHE4AM0
14Care and Maintenance
Maintenance Tasks
Certain areas of your dishwasher require occasional maintenance. the maintenance tasks  
are easy to do and will ensure continued superior performance from your dishwasher. 
these tasks are:
•  Winterizing Your Dishwasher
• Wiping up Spills and Splash-out
•  Clean the Stainless Steel Inner Door and Tub
•  Check/Clean the Spray Arm Nozzles
•  Check/Clean the Filter System
•  Clean the Exterior Door Panel
• Clean the Door Gasket
Winterizing Your Dishwasher
if your dishwasher will be unused for an extended period of time in a location that experiences 
freezing temperatures (e.g., in a holiday home or through a vacation period), have your 
dishwasher winterized by an authorized service center.
NOTICE
 To avoid dishwasher damage, do not allow water to remain in your dishwasher sys-
tems through extended periods of freezing temperatures. Freezing temperatures can damage your dishwasher. 
Wiping Up Spills and Splash-out
Water may occasionally splash out of your dishwasher, especially if you interrupt a cycle or 
open the dishwasher door during a cycle. To avoid floor damage and possible mold growth, do not allow wet areas to remain around or under the dishwasher.
Check/Clean the Stainless Steel Inner Door and Tub
Clean the outer edges of the inside door panel regularly to remove debris that might collect 
there from normal loading. 
if spots begin to appear on the stainless steel tub or inner door, make sure the rinse agent 
reservoir is full.
Check/Clean the Spray Arm Nozzles
occasionally check the spray arms to ensure that the spray arm nozzles (holes) are 
unobstructed. You must remove the spray arms to check them for obstruction. 
To remove the top spray arm:
1. remove the empty top rack from the dishwasher. 
2. t urn the rack upside-down. the top spray arm is held in position by a locking nut as 
shown in figure 17a . turn the locking nut counter-clockwise 1/8 turn and remove 
it, as shown in f igure 17B to release the spray arm.
3. remove the spray arm as shown in f igure 18.
4. look for obstruction in the spray nozzles.5. If the spray nozzles need cleaning, flush them under running water. 
To reinstall the top spray arm:
1. return the top spray arm to its installed position.
Figure 17
Figure 18
Figure 19A
B
152. return the locking nut to its installed position and turn it 1/8 turn clockwise.
3. return the top rack to the top rack roller guides.
To remove the bottom spray arm:
1. remove the empty bottom rack from the dishwasher tub.
2. Grasp and lift the bottom spray arm  as shown in f igure 19.
3. look for obstruction in the spray nozzles.4. If the spray nozzles need cleaning, flush them under running water. 
To reinstall the bottom spray arm:
1. r eturn the bottom spray arm to its installed position and press it so that it snaps into 
place.
2. return the bottom rack to its installed position.
Check/Clean the Filter System
This dishwasher has a filter system that consists of a Large Object Trap/Cylinder Filter assembly 
and a Fine Filter. Select models have an additional Micro Filter. The filter system is located on the 
inside of your dishwasher under the lower rack and is easily accessible.
During normal use, the filter system is self-cleaning. You should occasionally inspect it for foreign 
objects and clean it when necessary.
 CAUTION  
 
To avoid injury, do not reach into the large object trap with your fingers. The large object 
trap could contain sharp objects. 
To Remove the Large Object Trap/Cylinder Filter Assembly:
1. remove the bottom rack.
2. Grasp the assembly as shown in f igure 20 and turn it counter clockwise 1/4 turn.
3. lift out the assembly as shown in f igure 21 and 22. 
4. Carefully examine the assembly. If you find debris in the Large Object Trap, turn it upside-down 
and gently tap it on a surface such as a countertop to dislodge and remove the debris. flush 
the Cylinder filter clean by holding it under running water. place parts back in unit and lock 
as shown in f igure 23.
Figure 21Figure 20
Figure 22
Figure 23large object t rap
Fine
Filterto open - turn counterclockwise.
to close - turn clockwise.

16Clean the Exterior Door Panel
Colored Doorsuse only a soft cloth that is lightly dampened with soapy water. 
Stainless Steel Doors
use a soft cloth with a non-abrasive cleaner (preferably a liquid 
spray) made for cleaning stainless steel. for the best results, apply 
the stainless steel cleaner to the cloth, then wipe the surface. 
Clean the Door Gasket and Door Seal
regularly clean the door gasket with a damp cloth to remove food particles and other debris. also clean the door seal, located inside 
the dishwasher at the bottom of the door.
Wash Cycle Information
NOTE: To save energy, this dishwasher has a “Smart Control” that 
automatically adjusts the cycle based on soil loads and incoming 
water temperature. The “Smart Control” makes decisions that can 
cause the cycle time and water usage to adjust intermittently. the 
cycle times listed in the use and Care manual are based on normal 
soil loads and 120°f incoming water and will vary based on your 
actual conditions.
See the Cycles Chart to determine the cycles available for your specific 
model. 
NOTE: on select models, the Half load feature will reduce the water consumption by approximately 30 percent in the power scrub plus, 
regular, and auto Wash cycles. the eCo option may be selected for the 
power scrub plus, auto, regular and Delicate cycles on select models. 
this reduces energy consumption approximately 10% due to lower 
main wash and final rinse temperatures, but extends cycle length 5-10 
minutes to maintain drying performance and the water usage will be 
unmodified in comparison to the normal program cycles.
THE NSF S YMBOL
a dishwasher or a dishwasher cycle that has the nsf symbol has been 
certified by the NSF International to meet very strict requirements 
of wash time and water temperature to ensure dishware and 
kitchenware sanitization. these requirements are explained in the 
document nsf/ansi  184, residential Dishwashers. More information 
on NSF Certification is available at the NSF website, http://www.nsfconsumer.org/home/appliances.asp.
Your dishwasher is NSF certified. The dishwasher cycles that are 
NSF certified are shown in the following chart. When these cycles 
are complete, the “Sanitized” indicator on your dishwasher control panel will illuminate. 
NOTE: if your household water supply is too hot, your dishwasher’s 
heating time may be reduced and the “Sanitized” light or symbol may 
not illuminate. Your Dishwasher installation Manual has information on 
the recommended temperature for your household hot water supply. 
6.8
25.6Water 
Consumption 
in gallons
Water 
Consumption 
in liters
Wash t emp ˚f
Rinse Temp ˚FCycle t ime
(in minutes)
Minimum
MinimumMaximum
Maximumpower scrub 
plus
130
6.8
25.6
160˚
156˚
122˚-131 ˚
149˚-156˚122˚
156˚113˚
122˚incoming
incoming20.58.75.42.395-119 80
3.0
3.03.0
3.030 9
1.01.0
4.0
4.0regular 
WashDelicate/
economy*Quick
Washrinse &
Hold*
11.3 11.3
11.3 11.3Cycle Data
*select Models - refer to Cycle Chartauto 
Wash*
24.613.66.53.6105-125
130˚-150 ˚
156˚
Half load f unction
Water 
Consumption (l)
Water 
Consumption (gal)Cycle t ime
(in minutes)110 90-110
2.910.975
8.7-15.9 17.9
4.799-110
10.5-15.9
2.8- 4.2 2.3- 4.2not a vailable
17Self Help
Dishwashers may occasionally exhibit problems that are unrelated to a malfunction of the dishwasher itself. the following information 
may help you with a dishwasher problem without involving a repair professional.
Problem Cause Action
Dishwasher does not start Door may not be properly latched. 1. 
unit may not be turned on. 2. 
unit not reset or previous cycle not 3. 
completed.
Delay start engaged. 4. 
interruption of electrical power supply 5. 
to dishwasher or blown fuse.Child lock activated (select models). 6. 
the door may have been closed with- 7. 
out first selecting a cycle.
Water supply may not be turned on. 8. shut the door completely. 1. 
press the main power switch to turn unit on. 2. 
To reset, refer to “Canceling or changing the 3. 
cycle” section in this manual.
To reset, refer to “Delay Start” section in this 4. 
manual.
Check circuit breaker. 5. 
Deactivate the child lock. Refer to “Child Lock” 6. 
section in this manual if applicable.
select a cycle and close the door. 7. 
Check and turn on water supply. 8. 
Dishwasher beeping (end of cycle signal)Default factory settings alert the customer that the cycle has completed by beeping. this feature can be deactivated if so de-
sired.To adjust the volume or deactivate, refer to “Cycle 
Completion signal” section in this manual.
Display does not illuminate or console lights are not ona fuse may have been blown or circuit 1. 
breaker tripped.Door not closed or latched. 2. 
Note: For models with controls on the top 
portion of the door, the display only illumi -
nates when the door is opened and controls are visible. Check the fuse or circuit breaker box and re- 1. 
place the fuse or reset the breaker if neces-sary.ensure that door is properly latched and com- 2. 
pletely closed.
Dishwasher seems to run a long timeincoming water is not warm enough. 1. 
Cycle time can vary due to soil and wa- 2. 
ter conditions.rinse agent dispenser is empty. 3. 
Dishwasher connected to cold water 4. 
supply.
Note: Refer to “Cycle Chart Data” section in this manual for typical cycle length. Before starting a cycle, run hot water faucet at 1. 
the sink nearest to the dishwasher. 
sensors in the dishwasher automatically in- 2. 
crease the cycle time to ensure a good wash 
when heavy soil is detected.add rinse agent.  3. 
Verify dishwasher is connected to hot water 4. 
supply plumbing.
Dishes aren’t getting clean 
enoughspray arm movement is obstructed. 1. 
spray arm nozzles clogged. 2. 
improper use of detergents. 3. 
filters could be clogged. 4. 
Dishes are nested or loaded too close 5. 
together.
selected wash cycle is not suitable for 6. 
food soil condtions.ensure that spray arm movement is not 1. 
blocked by hand rotating spray arms. remove the spray arms and clean according to 2. 
“Check/Clean the Spray Arm Nozzles” in Care and Maintenance section of this manual.
increase or decrease detergent depending on 3. 
the water hardness. Refer to Table under “Add-
ing Detergent and rinse a gent”.
Clean the filter. Refer to “Check/Clean the Fil- 4. 
ter system” under Care and Maintenance sec-
tion of this manual.rearrange load such that water spray can reach 5. 
all items in the dishwasher. See also “Prepar -
ing and loading” section of this manual.
Refer to “Wash Cycle” section in Operating the 6. 
Dishwasher section of this manual.
18Problem Cause Action
Dishes are not getting dry enough rinse agent dispenser is empty. (rinse 1. 
agent indicator is activated).
improper loading of dishes. 2. 
selected cycle does not include drying. 3. Note: Plastic or Teflon do not typically dry 
as  completely as other items due to their 
inherent properties.add rinse agent. the use of rinse agent im- 1. 
proves drying.rearrange load to ensure items are not nest- 2. 
ed. Refer also to the “Preparing and Loading” section of this manual.
rinse and Hold setting does not include dry - 3. 
ing cycle,
Note: Select models offer an extra heating options 
to improve drying performance. Refer to “Wash Cy -
cle options”  under  the Operating the Dishwasher section of this manual.
odor food debris is present at the bottom of 1. 
the dishwasher.food particles are present near the 2. 
door seal.
Dishes left too long in unit before run- 3. 
ning a cycle.
residual water is present at the bottom 4. 
of the dishwasher.Drain hose is obstructed. 5. Remove the filters and clean according to the 1. 
“Check/Clean the Filter System” section of this manual.Refer to “Clean the Door Gasket and Door Seal” 2. 
in the Care and Maintenance section of this manual .run a rinse/Hold cycle if you do not intend to 3. 
immediately wash the dishes.ensure the unit has completely drained from 4. 
the last cycle. Refer to the “Canceling or chang-ing the cycle” section of this manual.remove any obstructions from the drain hose 5. 
by calling qualified personnel.
Note: If odor still persists, run the Normal/Regular cycle until it flushes and interrupt the cycle and place an 8 oz. cup of distilled white vinegar solu-tion on the top rack and then finish the cycle.
Dishwasher not filling with water restriction in the water supply system. 1. 
previous wash cycle was not complet- 2. 
ed.Delay-start is active. 3. ensure that the water supply valve (typically  1. 
located under kitchen sink) is open and check that the water supply line has no kinks and clogs.
Refer to the “Canceling or changing the cycle” 2. 
section of this manual.
Cancel the delay-start or wait until delay-start 3. 
time completes (times out). Refer to the “De-lay s tart” section of this manual.
Water leaks suds 1. 
Door seal could be pulled away from 2. 
track.Condensation vent is blocked. 3. 
improper installation. 4. Wrong type of detergent results in suds and 1. 
leaks. use only dishwasher detergents. if suds 
still persist, then add one tablespoon of veg-etable oil at the bottom of the dishwasher and 
run the desired cycle.
ensure that door seal is in the track. 2. 
ensure that condensation vent is not blocked. 3. 
Have proper installation verified by qualified 4. 
personnel (water supply, drain system, level-ing, plumbing).
tub stains stains on the dishwasher interior are 1. 
due to hardness of water.silverware in contact with tub. 2. Concentrated lemon juice can reduce the 1. 
build up of hard water stains. run a normal cy -
cle until it flushes and interrupt the cycle and then place an 8 oz. cup of the concentrated lemon solution on the top rack and finish the cycle. this can be done periodically to avoid 
build up.ensure that the silverware does not make con- 2. 
tact with the tub while running a cycle.
19streaks on glassware or residue on the 
dishes  incorrect rinse agent setting. Depending on the hardness of water, adjust 
the rinse agent dispenser. Refer to “Adding Detergent and rinse agent” section in this 
manual for adjustment.
fascia panel discolored or marked abrasive cleaner used. use mild detergents with soft damp cloth.
noise during wash cycle the dishes may not be arranged properly. Water circulation sound is normal, but if you 
suspect items are banging into each other or 
into the spray arms, refer to the “Preparing and loading” section of this manual for opti-
mal arrangement.
Detergent dispenser cover will not shut improper operation of detergent 1. 
cover.Previous cycle has not been fin- 2. 
ished,  reset, or cycle was inter -
rupted.Refer to “Adding Detergent and Rinse Aid” 1. 
section of this manual for instructions on opening and closing the dispenser.Refer to the “Canceling or changing the 2. 
cycle” section of this manual.
unable to select desired cycle Previous cycle has not finished. Refer to the “Canceling or changing the cycle” section of this manual.Problem Cause Action
20
Customer Service
Figure 25
     serial n umber         Model n umberModel and serial n umber labelYour Bosch dishwasher requires no special care other than that described in the Care and Maintenance section. if you are having a 
problem with your dishwasher, before calling for service please refer to the self Help section. if service is necessary, contact your 
dealer or installer or an authorized service center. Do not attempt to repair the appliance yourself. any work performed by unau -
thorized personnel may void the warranty.
if you are having a problem with your Bosch dishwasher and are not pleased with the service you have received, please take the 
following steps (in the order listed below) until the problem is corrected to your satisfaction:
1. Contact your installer or the Bosch a uthorized service Contractor in your area.
2.  Contact customer service through our website, www.boschappliances.com.
3.  Write us at the address below:
 BsH Home appliances, Corporation
 5551 Mcf adden a venue
   Huntington Beach, C a 92649
4.  Call us at 1-800-944-2904.
please be sure to include your model information listed below as well as an explanation of the problem and the date it originated.
You will find the model and serial number information on the label located on the right edge of the dishwasher door as shown in 
figure 32.
also, if you are writing, please include a daytime phone number where you can be reached.
please make a copy of your invoice and keep it with this manual. the customer must show proof of purchase to obtain warranty 
service.  Your Model Information:
CAUTION
Removing any cover or pulling the dishwasher from the 
cabinet can expose hot water connections, electrical power and sharp edges or points.•  Model Number
•  Serial Number
•  Date Purchased
•  Date Installed

21Statement of Limited Product Warranty
Bosch Dishwashers
What this Warranty Covers & Who it Applies to:  the limited warranty 
provided BSH Home Appliances (“Bosch”) in this Statement of Limited Product 
Warranty applies only to Bosch dishwashers (“Product”) sold to you, the 
first using purchaser, provided that the Product was purchased: (1) for your normal, household (non-commercial) use, and has in fact at all times only 
been used for normal household purposes; (2) new at retail (not a display, 
“as is”, or previously returned model), and not for resale, or commercial use; and (3) within the united states or Canada, and has at all times remained 
within the country of original purchase. the warranties stated herein 
apply only to the first purchaser of the Product and are not transferable.   
•	 please make sure to return your registration card; while not necessary 
to effectuate warranty coverage, it is the best way for Bosch to notify you in the unlikely event of a safety notice or product recall.  
How Long the Warranty Lasts:  Bosch warrants that the product is 
free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of three 
hundred sixty five (365) days (i.e., 1 year) from the date of purchase.  
the foregoing timeline begins to run upon the date of purchase, and 
shall not be stalled, tolled, extended, or suspended, for any reason whatsoever.    labor and shipping costs are included in this basic coverage.  
Extended Limited Warranty:  Bosch also provides these additional limited warranties: 
•	 2 Year Limited Warranty:  Bosch will repair or replace any 
component that proves to be defective in materials or workmanship (excludes labor charges).
•	 5 Year Limited Warranty on Electronics:  Bosch will repair or replace any Bosch microprocessor or printed circuit board if it proves to be defective in materials or workmanship (excludes labor charges).
•	 5 Year Limited Warranty on Dish Racks:  Bosch will replace the upper or lower dish rack (excluding rack components), if the rack proves defective in materials or workmanship (excludes labor charges).
•	 Lifetime Warranty against Stainless Steel Rust Through:  Bosch 
will replace your dishwasher with the same model or a current model that is substantially equivalent or better in functionality, if the inner liner should rust through (excludes labor charges). Bosch will replace the stainless steel door if the door should rust through (excludes labor charges).
the foregoing timeline begins to run upon the date of purchase, and shall not be stalled, tolled, extended, or suspended, for any reason whatsoever.   
Repair/Replace as Your Exclusive Remedy:  During this warranty period, 
Bosch or one of its authorized service providers will repair your product 
without charge to you (subject to certain limitations stated herein) if your product proves to have been manufactured with a defect in materials or workmanship.  if reasonable attempts to repair the product have been 
made without success, then Bosch will replace your product (upgraded 
models may be available to you, in Bosch’s sole discretion, for an additional charge).  all removed parts and components shall become the property 
of Bosch at its sole option. all replaced and/or repaired parts shall assume 
the identity of the original part for purposes of this warranty and this warranty shall not be extended with respect to such parts. Bosch’s sole liability and responsibility hereunder is to repair manufacturer-defective product only, using a Bosch-authorized service provider during normal 
business hours. for safety and property damage concerns, Bosch highly 
recommends that you do not attempt to repair the product yourself, or 
use an un-authorized servicer; Bosch will have no responsibility or liability for repairs or work performed by a non-authorized servicer.  if you choose 
to have someone other than an authorized service provider work on your product, tHis W arrant Y Will autoMatiC allY BeC oMe null anD V oiD. 
authorized service providers are those persons or companies that have been 
specially trained on Bosch products, and who possess, in Bosch’s opinion, a superior reputation for customer service and technical ability (note that they are independent entities and are not agents, partners, affiliates or 
representatives of Bosch). notwithstanding the foregoing, Bosch will not 
incur any liability, or have responsibility, for the product if it is located in a 
remote area (more than 100 miles from an authorized service provider) or is reasonably inaccessible, hazardous, threatening, or treacherous locale, surroundings, or environment; in any such event, if 
you request, Bosch would still pay for labor and parts and ship the parts to 
the nearest authorized service provider, but you would still be fully liable and responsible for any travel time or other special charges by the service 
company, assuming they agree to make the service call.  
Out of Warranty Product:  Bosch is under no obligation, at law or 
otherwise, to provide you with any concessions, including repairs,  
pro-rates, or product replacement, once this warranty has expired.
Warranty Exclusions:  the warranty coverage described herein excludes 
all defects or damage that are not the direct fault of Bosch, including 
without limitation, one or more of the following: (1) use of the product 
in anything other than its normal, customary and intended manner 
(including without limitation, any form of commercial use, use or storage 
of an indoor product outdoors, use of the product in conjunction with air 
or water-going vessels); (2) any party’s willful misconduct, negligence, misuse, abuse, accidents, neglect, improper operation, failure to maintain, 
improper or negligent installation, tampering, failure to follow operating 
instructions, mishandling, unauthorized service (including self-performed 
“fixing” or exploration of the appliance’s internal workings); (3) adjustment, alteration or modification of any kind; (4) a failure to comply with any applicable state, local, city, or county electrical, plumbing and/or building codes, regulations, or laws, including failure to install the product in strict conformity with local fire and building codes and regulations; (5) ordinary wear and tear, spills of food, liquid, grease accumulations, or other substances that accumulate on, in, or around the product; and (6) 
any external, elemental and/or environmental forces and factors, including without limitation, rain, wind, sand, floods, fires, mud slides, freezing temperatures, excessive moisture or extended exposure to humidity, lightning, power surges, structural failures surrounding the appliance, and acts of God.  in no event shall Bosch have any liability or responsibility 
whatsoever for damage to surrounding property, including cabinetry, floors, ceilings, and other structures or objects around the Product.  also excluded from this warranty are scratches, nicks, minor dents, and cosmetic damages on external surfaces and exposed parts; products 
on which the serial numbers have been altered, defaced, or removed; service visits to teach you how to use the product, or visits where there 
is nothing wrong with the product; correction of installation problems 
(you are solely responsible for any structure and setting for the product, 
including all electrical, plumbing or other connecting facilities, for proper foundation/flooring, and for any alterations including without limitation cabinetry, walls, floors, shelving, etc.); and resetting of breakers or fuses.  TO THE EXTENT ALLOWED BY LAW, THIS WARRANTY SETS OUT YOUR EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES WITH RESPECT TO PRODUCT, WHETHER THE CLAIM ARISES IN CONTRACT OR TORT (INCLUDING STRICT LIABILITY, OR NEGLIGENCE) OR OTHERWISE.  THIS WARRANTY IS IN LIEU OF ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. ANY WARRANTY IMPLIED BY LAW, WHETHER FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ONLY FOR THE PERIOD THAT THIS EXPRESS LIMITED WARRANTY IS EFFECTIVE. IN NO EVENT WILL THE MANUFACTURER BE LIABLE FOR CONSEQUENTIAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, “BUSINESS LOSS”, AND/OR PUNITIVE DAMAGES, LOSSES, OR EXPENSES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION TIME AWAY FROM WORK, HOTELS AND/OR RESTAURANT MEALS, REMODELLING EXPENSES IN EXCESS OF DIRECT DAMAGES WHICH ARE DEFINITIVELY CAUSED EXCLUSIVELY BY BOSCH, OR OTHERWISE.  SOME STATES DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION OF INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, AND SOME STATES DO NOT ALLOW LIMITATIONS ON HOW LONG AN IMPLIED WARRANTY LASTS, SO THE ABOVE LIMITATIONS MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.  THIS WARRANTY GIVES YOU SPECIFIC LEGAL RIGHTS, AND YOU MAY ALSO HAVE OTHER RIGHTS WHICH VARY FROM STATE TO STATE.   
no attempt to alter, modify or amend this warranty shall 
be effective unless authorized in writing by an officer of BsH.  
How to Obtain Warranty Service:   to oBtain W arrant Y serViCe for 
YOUR PRODUCT, YOU SHOULD CONTACT THE NEAREST BOSCH AUTHORIZED serViCe Center, or C all 800-944-2904, or write Bosch at:  BsH Home 
appliances - 5551 Mcf adden a venue, Huntington Beach, C a 92649 / 