	  
 Website User Manual 

“Bridgeman Education is breath-taking: 
a beautifully rendered product at a sensible price. Obviously a labour of love and enormous creativity. The high-quality and extensive content is made easily 
accessible through quick search and browsing in a 
wealth of categories and subcategories. 
Unreservedly recommended for all libraries serving 
anyone needing art and historic images.” 
Library Journal 
Introduction to the new website 
Searching:
Quick Search 
Advanced Search
Subject Categories 
Search Tips 
Viewing Images: 
Results View Detailed image view 
Zooming 
Saving and Retrieving Image
 
The Slideshow: 
Creating a slideshow 
Viewing a slideshow Saving and editing a slideshow
Retrieving a slideshow
Downloading a slideshow 
Other Bridgeman Services 
	  
Introduction to the new website 

Bridgeman Education is a complete visual resource for students, educators and academic 
professionals both in and out of the classroom.  It has been developed on the basis of research carried out by our postdoctoral researcher for the beneﬁt of the educational e-learning sector.  
Building on the experience and feedback gathered over the years, the new site provides all the 
functionality of the previous version as well as enhanced and additional features such as: 
• Detailed usage statistics – available on request or via Counter 
• Shibboleth access • Compliance to standards such as COUNTER, Z3950 and Open URL 
• Compliance to W3C standards for accessibility and disability 
• Touch-screen friendly – ideal whiteboard tool 
• Zoom feature and ability to capture details and store in the slideshows 
• Many more images added from museums, private galleries and historical societies around the world 
This manual explains the many ways in which to use the site in order to get the most out of our vast 
resource.  For all further questions, please get in touch with the Bridgeman Education team – the 
contact details can be found at the foot of each page. 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  
Searching
Bridgeman Education offers two search 
functions, the Quick and the Advanced search, 
as well as a range of indexes and Subject categories available to all subscribed 
members.
Quick Search
This is a 'Google' type search using keywords that will retrieve results 
containing one or more of the keywords you enter into the Search ﬁeld. 
The results will be sorted by relevance, i.e. results corresponding to all 
search terms ﬁrst then in decreasing relevance.  For example, a search 
using the keywords “Hopper, woman and street” ﬁrst will retrieve results containing all three words, then will retrieve results containing two of 
them, and ﬁnally will retrieve results containing all results with just one 
of the keywords.
You can change this option and organize your search results by ‘most 
recent’. 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
Advanced Search
The Advanced Search allows you to narrow the focus of the search by 
including details such as:
Search all ﬁelds (using keywords)
Image title 
Artist's name
Medium (photograph, oil on canvas, stone, watercolor, etc.) 
Location (as in where the original is kept e.g. ‘Louvre’)**
YearCentury
**Location refers to the current location of the work country or institution.  
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
The Advanced search function is particularly useful when looking for artists with a generic name such as Black, 
Jones, etc., or for images at a speciﬁc location such as the Prado, Washington D.C., Guggenheim, Louvre and so on.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
Once you hit Search you can:
Search within results 
Select the orientation of the image 
Filter the results by color
Order the search results by 
Best Relevance
Most recent image
Image numberArtist name
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

	  
Subject categories
Image selections pre-created by
Bridgeman Education picture researchers
We currently have 13 subject categories live on the site organizing our collection by Movement, Period, School, 
Subject, Medium, etc.  The subject categories are also organized according to areas of study such as Graphic 
Design, Geography, Medicine and many more.  Additionally, we have created conceptual selections based on 
emotions.
We add to our subject categories regularly and are happy to hear of any gaps that you might want ﬁlled or categories 
that are in need of more content.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

Each category is divided into several sub-categories, which provide more detail and speciﬁc content on each subject. 
Once you have opened a subject category, you will ﬁnd a series of topics listed within it that in turn can be clicked on.  These 
sub-categories will lead you to speciﬁc image selections. 
We recommend you take your time in exploring all of the subjects because many of these categories are several “levels” deep.  
Here is our Movement, Period, School category as an example.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  
Search Tips
Special keywords, Boolean search and other
useful tips to perform searches
You can try the following to narrow down your search results.
Use a negative search to exclude certain result: enter a minus sign without a space in front of your search term
Another example would be to type in "Jean-Francois Millet NOT landscape "; the search will remove all of Millet’s 
landscapes and narrow the results down to mainly portraits.
Use OR: add OR to your keyword searches to ensure that you retrieve all possible results around one topic
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
Spelling
In order to increase your chances of ﬁnding the correct results, try using different spellings. 
For example, when looking for St Mark’s Venice, also try searching SAN MARCO.
Similar examples are:
Mohammad II - try Mohammed Ii
ALIXI, ALEXEI, ALEXY, etc.
Similarly, when looking for images associated with a particular movement, style or period, try the following:
• Impressionist  not – ism
• Expressionist  not – ism
• Realist  not – ism
You can also refer to our Subjects page menu as you will ﬁnd a lot of these subjects have been pre-selected for you.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
Keywords
Once you find an image, be sure to look at the keywords listed on the right hand side.  Clicking on these words will 
lead you to other related results.
Try using fewer keywords in your searches; the fewer keywords used , the broader the selection of resul ts.  Think 
laterally when searc hing.  For e xample, if you are looking for images of an event that occu rred in a certain place 
at a specific time, try using all related keywords in order to broaden y our search, e.g. Berlin wall, 1989 , Germany, 
photograp h, reuni on, celebration, cold war, etc.
You can also try searching moods , colors and forms, e.g. blue, g reen, colorful, concep tual, geometric, shape, 
jealousy, happi ness, contemplation, s adness , atmosph eric, spiritual, merriment, melancho ly, etc.  The Subjects 
category also contains a pre-sel ected concep tual index .
NB. When searching for men or women be sure to ent er male/female as search term key words as well.
Boolean Search
Using a star (*) or ‘wildcard’ word prefix will hel p you find words with the same b eginning and multiple endi ngs. For 
instance, Kand* will bring up i mages of Kandi nsky whether they are written with a y or an i.
This feature is great for plurals, for  languages like Russian, or for mo vement s such as Romant ici –st or –ism.
Bound search
Using quotations around speciﬁc phrasing, i.e. “Tiger, Tiger Burning B right” or “dejeuner sur l’herbe” or “word play,” 
will nar row down your resul ts to that specific wording.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  
Viewing Images
Search results order, image size and 
information options
Results view:
Search results will ﬁrst be displayed at thumbnail size across one or more pages.  The total number of results will 
be shown at the top of the page as well as the manner in which the results have been sorted, i.e. by best 
relevance, most recent, asset number, or artist name.  You can change this order by using the drop down box 
below:
 
The number of page results is at the bottom of each page.  You can use the arrows to move between the pages 
or to go straight to the last or ﬁrst page of results.
In the thumbnail format, you will see partial captions:
The partial captions include the title of  the work, name of the 
artist, and dates where known as well as the Bridgeman 
reference number.
The icons below the image allow you to:
Add the image to a slideshow
Open the zoom window
Download the image
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

	  	  
Detailed image view:
If you want to view the larger version of the image, simply click on the image itself.  This will open a new window in 
which you can view the complete image details and keywords that can be clicked on to take you to related results.
 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Zooming:
From the search results page, you can zoom into the image and view it in detail.  Simply click on the eye icon:
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Zooming:
This will open a new window in which you can use the magnifying glass to zoom into the image.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Zooming:
To exit this view, simply click on the cross
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Not all our images have been scanned to a high enoug h resol ution to allow for zoomi ng.  I f this is the case, you will 
get the following message: 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

	  
Saving Images
Saving and r etrieving images on 
your computer  or in an online slidesho w
	  	  
Saving images
From the search results :
Simply click on the Download button;
the image will be saved in your downloads folder.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  
The Slideshow
Saving, editing, adding notes, and 
downloading
	  	  
Creating a Slideshow
The Slidesho w function allows you to create y our own collections of images, i.e. slideshows, w hich you can then annot ate, 
view and download.  This is a handy w ay of keeping selections of images available onlin e so that you can retrieve them 
from different locations and comput ers.  You can also review your selection and s ave or d iscard it a t your leisure.
To create a slidesho w, simp ly click on the ’”Select” button found undernea th every ima ge in search resul ts.  Then click on 
“Create slideshow”
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Creating a Slideshow
Select an existing option or name a new slideshow and press “Save. ”
Once your slideshow is created, you will see this message in the top right corner of the screen.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Adding images
To add i mages to a slidesho w, click on the ‘”Ad d to slide show‘” but ton found undernea th every ima ge in the search resul ts.
You can also drag and drop an image to the box on the right.
You have the option to add 
duplicate images to your 
slideshow.  This can be 
particularly useful if you are 
planning to save cropped details 
of your images.
When you add a duplicate, a pop-
up window will alert you that you 
are adding a duplicate. 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

	  	  
Viewing a Slideshow
To open a slidesho w, click on the “View  slidesho w” bar found in the slideshow panel to the right of the s earch resul ts. 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Assets and Slideshow options
Now that you have opened the slideshow, you can: 
 
• Select or Deselect all assets and remove them           
from the slideshow 
 
• Play the slideshow 
 • Share the slideshow with another Bridgeman 
Education user 
 • Download the slideshow and the notes** you made 
Under the assets 
 in a PDF document. 
 
** The Notes you save in the slideshow box will not be 
visualized when downloading the PDF. 
 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

	  	  
Editing a Slideshow
To access the editing capabilities of the slideshow, click on the “ Play slideshow” bar:
A viewer window will open, and images are shown in full screen by default. 
Click on the wheel symbol.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Display option of a Slideshow
The following viewing options will be available:
• Full screen view 
• 1 image view
• 2 images view 
• 4 images view
By selecting or de-selecting Title, Artist and/or 
Caption , the corresponding information will be 
displayed or hidden from your slideshow.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Editing images in a Slideshow
Below each image you have 3 icons:
• Edit Asset
• Download Image
• Remove Image from Slideshow
“Download Image” and “Remove Image from 
Slideshow” are self-explanatory.  We will 
concentrate on the “Edit Asset” function.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Editing images in a Slideshow
Clicking on the “Edit Asset” button will open the below window in which you can edit the Asset’s ﬁelds (Title, Artist and 
Caption) and crop the image. 
To edit the text ﬁelds, simply add or remove text in the boxes beneath the headers.  To Edit the image, click on “ Edit Crop.”
 
 
 
 
  
 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Clicking on “Edit Crop” will open the window below in which you select the portion of image you want to save.
Once you are satisﬁed with the cropped image, click on the green button and you will return to the edit Asset Window.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
You now can preview your edits.
To save, press “Save,” and the slideshow will update 
(see next slide).
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
NB: Editing an asset will override the original one.
If you wish to have the original version of the image (in this case image XIR16611), simply search for the asset again 
and add it to the slideshow.  You may also add two copies of the same image before creating a crop.  
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Deleting a Slideshow
You can access a list of your Slideshows by clicking on either
Slideshows or My Account
Either option will open the following window.  To delete the slideshow, click on the corresponding button.
 
 
 
  
 
 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Creating a Slideshow – Private versus Public
When you create a slideshow, it will automatically be made public.  If you are using Bridgeman Education through a 
school  or university, the slideshows you create are public to all other users in your school or university. 
In order to make a slideshow private, you need to deselect the  Make Public box and add your email address. 
Once a slideshow is made private or public, its status cannot be changed.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
NB: you will receive an email with the unique, private URL 
of your slideshow shortly after creating it.
Currently, there is no functionality to retrieve private 
slideshows from your account, so please keep this URL 
safe.
	  	  
Reordering Images in a Slideshow
Simply drag and drop the images in the order you prefer:
 
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  

	  	  
Downloading a Slideshow
The slideshow i s best used on line through the 
Bridgeman Educa tion websit e.
It can be retrieved through any browser on any 
computer with your usern ame and pass word if you 
are out of IP range.  
However, if you wish to download a copy of the 
slideshow simply use the “ Download”  button to 
save a PDF ﬁle.
NB:  Any cropping edits and/or edits to the title, 
artist, and/or caption will be visible in the PDF.  
However, any notes you save in the slideshow 
notes box will not be visible in the downloaded 
PDF.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  	  
Sharing a Slideshow
To share the slideshow, click on the “Share” button 
and add the email address of the person to whom 
you wish to send it.
NB:  The slideshow can be shared only with 
Bridgeman Education Registered Users.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
	  
Bridgeman Family &
Bridgeman Services

40 years experience as the 
world’s leader in providing 
Rights Managed images & 
Footage.Bridgeman Contemporary artists' portal to show their 
work and have their work 
commissioned.  A leading footage service that provides ﬁlm clips to TV, 
Documentary and Movie 
clients around the world.The leading provider of educational content to teachers, 
colleges and universities.Partnered with Art.com to 
create products with 
the world's leading art, 
photography and sculpture.
A leading footage service that 
provides ﬁlm clips to TV, 
Documentary and Movie 
clients around the world.A leading footage service that provides ﬁlm clips to TV, 
Documentary and Movie 
clients around the world.

	  	  
Our skilled researchers are 
here to help you source 
images, clear copyright, 
search our extensive ofﬂine 
archive and much more.Don't	  be	  dictated	  by	  exis0ng	  
images:	  commission	  your	  own	  
from	  a	  Bridgeman	  Studio	  ar0st	  
and	  license	  it	  exclusively.	  Bridgeman will help clear 
copyright on behalf of prestigious 
Artists and Artists’ Estates  or will 
guide you to the right copyright-
holders. Bridgeman	  Images	  –	  Corporate	  Presenta,on	  
Don't be limited by existing 
images; commission your own 
image from a Bridgeman 
Studio artist and license it 
exclusively.

Image Licensing 
Your Bridgeman Education license covers you for all educational, non-commercial use of our 
images.  If you would like to use one of our images in a published paper, book or paid lecture, you 
will need to request a new license for that one use. 
This is quick and easy; simply call +1 212 828 1238, or email  nysales@bridgemanimages.com .  
We will ask for relevant details, inform you of any applicable additional rights or restrictions, and 
provide a price quote.
©Bridgeman Education - Tel: +1 212 828 1238 bridgemaneducation@bridgemaneducation.com  
Leslie Wong
Leslie.wong@bridgemanimages.com
Tel: +1 212 828 1238
Wendy Zieger
Wendy.zieger@bridgemanimages.com 
Tel: +1 212 828 1238 