                         FOREST INDUSTRY SAFETY ACCORD 
                          
                         INFORMATION LEAFLET 004-0415 
                         Lone Working 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                          
                                                                                                                                                                April 2015 
                         Lone working 
                          
                         1.  Introduction  
                                
                         This article provides guidance on how to keep lone workers healthy and safe.  It is for; 
                                    anyone who employs or engages lone workers 
                                    self-employed people who work alone 
                                    employees who work alone  
                          
                         Following the guidance is not compulsory, but it should help employers and lone workers 
                         understand how to manage lone working. This guidance is based on the HSE leaflet INDG73 (rev3) 
                         Working Alone. 
                          
                          
                         2.  Is it legal to work alone and is it safe?  
                          
                         Working alone is not against the law and it will often be safe to do so. However, the law requires 
                         employers to consider carefully, and then deal with, any health and safety risks for people working 
                         alone so that they comply with their legal duties under: 
                                    the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974;  
                                    The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999. 
                          
                          
                         3.  Who are lone workers? 
                          
                         Lone workers are those who work by themselves without close or direct supervision, for example:  
                                    harvester or Forwarder driver at the start or end of a site 
                                    machine operators working on different parts of site 
                                    chainsaw operators working on site but out of risk zone of others 
                                    timber purchaser visiting a sale 
                                    drivers (timber haulier/delivery) visiting remote locations 
                                    a person working alone in a workshop  
                          
                          
                         4.  How must risks of lone working be controlled? 
                          
                         Employer’s responsibilities: 
                          
                         Employers are responsible for the health, safety and welfare at work of all their workers. They also 
                         have responsibility for the health and safety of any contractors or self-employed people doing work 
                         Registered office: FISA, 59 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 2JG 
                         Registration number 450652 
                         www.ukfisa.com           
                          
