                           Reason for update: Type II WS161 Maternal Immunisation (GDS8) + Type II WS166 Initial Immunisation (GDS9) 
                           Agency Approval Date:  
                           Text Date: 03/11/2016 
                           Issue 6, draft 3 
                            
                            
                            
                                                               Package leaflet: Information for the user 
                            
                                                    Boostrix®, Suspension for injection in pre-filled syringe 
                             Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (acellular, component) vaccine (adsorbed, reduced antigen(s) 
                                                                                      content) 
                            
                           Read all of this leaflet carefully before you or your child start receiving this vaccine because 
                           it contains important information for you. 
                            
                           -     Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
                           -     If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
                           -     This vaccine has been prescribed for you or your child only. Do not pass it on to others. 
                           -     If you or your child get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any 
                                 possible side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
                            
                           What is in this leaflet 
                           1.    What Boostrix is and what it is used for 
                           2.    What you need to know before you or your child receive Boostrix  
                           3.    How Boostrix is given 
                           4.    Possible side effects 
                           5.    How to store Boostrix 
                           6.    Contents of the pack and other information 
                            
                            
                           1.      What Boostrix is and what it is used for 
                            
                           Boostrix is a vaccine used as a booster dose in children from 4 years onwards, teenagers and 
                           adults to prevent three diseases: diphtheria, tetanus (lockjaw) and pertussis (whooping cough). 
                           The vaccine works by causing the body to produce its own protection (antibodies) against these 
                           diseases. 
                            
                                  Diphtheria: Diphtheria mainly affects the airways and sometimes the skin. Generally the 
                                   airways become inflamed (swollen) causing severe breathing difficulties and sometimes 
                                   suffocation. The bacteria also release a toxin (poison), which can cause nerve damage, heart 
                                   problems, and even death. 
                                  Tetanus (Lockjaw): Tetanus bacteria enter the body through cuts, scratches or wounds in 
                                   the skin. Wounds that are especially prone to infection are burns, fractures, deep wounds or 
                                   wounds contaminated with soil, dust, horse manure/dung or wood splinters. The bacteria 
                                   release a toxin (poison), which can cause muscle stiffness, painful muscle spasms, fits and 
                                   even death. The muscle spasms can be strong enough to cause bone fractures of the spine. 
                                  Pertussis (Whooping cough): Pertussis is a highly infectious illness. The disease affects the 
                                   airways causing severe spells of coughing that may interfere with normal breathing. The 
                                   coughing is often accompanied by a “whooping” sound, hence the common name 
                                   “whooping cough”. The cough may last for 1-2 months or longer. Pertussis can also cause 
                                   ear infections, bronchitis which may last a long time, pneumonia, fits, brain damage and 
                                   even death.  
                            
                           None of the ingredients in the vaccine can cause diphtheria, tetanus or whooping cough. 
