        
               Purchase Order Based Invoice Requirements 
        
       No 1 – Know your Purchase Order number  
        
       Most purchases of Mondelēz International require SAP Purchase Order (PO), which is typically 
       transmitted to your sales department per e-mail or fax (if you have not received it, please approach your 
       contact person in Mondelēz International).  
       PO number is required for processing of your invoice, therefore please make sure that the number you 
       provide:  
           is relevant for the purchase you’re invoicing (you might have multiple invoices per PO, but it is 
          very unlikely that you can use one number for the whole year, most probably you’re missing a 
          fresh PO)  
           has correct format (validation of invoices is automated, if the format is wrong, your invoice will 
          be rejected) 
           is the correct Mondelēz International entity which issued the PO. 
        
        
                                   
                                  On our Purchase Order you can find 
                                  all  necessary  details,  including  the 
                                  PO  Number  and  the  Mondelēz 
                                  International´s bill to entity 
                                   
        
       No 2 – No more than 1 PO in an Invoice 
        
       An Invoice should be related to only one Purchase Order. If multiple PO numbers are included in the 
       same invoice, its verification has to be done manually and might delay your payment. 
        
       No 3 – State PO Line Item number on each invoice line  
        
       A PO can have more than one line, numbered 10, 20, 30… etc. Creating one Invoice line per PO line item, 
       and keeping the order the same as in the PO allows us to post your invoice much faster.  
        
       No 4 – Check purchase order information (unit of measure & currency)  
        
       If the PO is issued in kilograms, use kilograms as unit for your invoice. Using tons will create unnecessary 
       discrepancies and your invoice will have to be approved before it can be released.  
       Please make sure the currency of your invoice matches with the PO. If this is not the case, the invoice 
       will be rejected and a new one will be required with the same currency as the PO. 
