              
                                                        Action Plan  
                        for the implementation of Articles 11(1) and 11(2)  
                                      of the Treaty on European Union 
                      Towards better EU civil dialogue and involvement of citizens for better policy-making 
                                                   building on the Riga Roadmap 
                                                                     
                  
                                          Article 11(1) and 11(2) of the Treaty on EU 
                "1. The institutions shall, by appropriate means, give citizens and representative associations the 
                   opportunity to make known and publicly exchange their views in all areas of Union action. 
                 2. The institutions shall maintain an open, transparent and regular dialogue with representative 
                                                associations and civil society." 
                  
                  
             1. INTRODUCTION 
                  
             1.1​.​ Purpose 
             This action plan is intended as a follow-up to the relevant Roadmap adopted by the NGO Forum in Riga 
                                                                                                                1
             in 2015, outlining the concrete actions needed for the implementation of better civil dialogue  in the 
             EU and the involvement of citizens and their associations. It reflects citizens’ calls for better decisions, 
             better policy making and better governance responding to citizens’ needs. 
              
             The action plan sets out a vision of what the dialogue should seek to achieve and how it could be 
             implemented in an effective, constructive and realistic manner with the widest range of supporters 
             and  stakeholders.  It  lays  the  groundwork  for  civil  dialogue  in  which  representative  civil  society 
             organisations play a key role while, at the same time, the full potential of citizens, directly involved or 
             not with CSOs, is harnessed. In this respect, "a distinction should be drawn between consultations of 
             civil  society  organisations  and  of  the  general  public.  The difference between the two is not only a 
             matter  of  methodology,  but  also  of  objective,  since  for  the  former  group  the  aim  is  to  ensure 
                                                                                                          2
             representativeness, while for the latter, it is about promoting inclusion and participation" . 
              
             1.2. Current context  
             Article 11 of the Treaty on European Union provides the legal basis for this. EU institutions, Member 
                                     3
             States and civil society  — including but not limited to individuals and representative associations — 
             must work together to put Article 11 into practice. Civil society organisations (CSOs) play a crucial role 
             in promoting active citizenship in Europe. Participatory democracy needs intermediary bodies if it is 
             to involve the citizens and encourage them to express their views in all civic spaces. Civil dialogue has 
             1
               ​The European Economic and Social Committee defines civil dialogue as a democratic and public 
             opinion-forming process which can take various forms, depending on the players involved. 
             2
               ​EESC Opinion on​ Evaluation of consultation of stakeholders by the European Commission​, ​OJC 383, 17.11.2015, p. 
             58​. 
             3
               In accordance with the ​Council of Europe Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation 14 (2007)​ civil society 
             organisations are defined as “voluntary self-governing bodies or organisations established to pursue the 
             essentially non-profit-making objectives of their founders or members.  They do not include political parties.” 
                                                                                                                      1 
              
