                     Journal of Education and Practice                                                                                                                                                      www.iiste.org 
                     ISSN 2222-1735 (Paper)   ISSN 2222-288X (Online) 
                     Vol.7, No.30, 2016 
                      
                            Do Kenyan Set Book Novel Kidagaa Kimemwozea Advance 
                                                            Environmental Education? 
                                                                                        
                                                                       Stephen Njangiru Magothe 
                         Department of Literary and Communication Studies, Laikipia University P.O Box 1100,Nyahururu,Kenya 
                                                                                        
                     Abstract 
                     Environmental protection is a sensitive issue in the world today. Erratic weather changes have been witnessed in 
                     many parts world including Kenya. Indeed, scholars and critics have argued that human beings are a major 
                     contributing factor to destruction of nature through industrialization, farming activities, transport, deforestation, 
                     wildlife  attacks,  and  destruction  of  wetlands,  unplanned  rubbish  dumping  and  pollution.  Environmental 
                     protection as a problem is real and has dire consequences such as global warming, soil erosion, floods, reduction 
                     in wetlands, drought, pollution, human wildlife conflict, diseases and illnesses, food insecurity, unsafe drinking 
                     water,  desertification  among  other  threats.  In  underdeveloped  countries  like  Kenya  the  consequences  are 
                     devastating. It’s because of this global reality that the researcher sought to establish whether environmental 
                     education  is  advanced  in  Kidagaa  Kimemwozea;  a  Kenyan  secondary  school  Swahili  novel  set  book.  The 
                     objectives were: To examine the environmental themes in the Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book and 
                     to evaluate its environmental protection impact on learners. The sampled Kidagaa Kimemwozea novel set book 
                     was  content  analyzed  in  terms  of  environmental  theme  illustrations  through  ordinary  words.  Moreover,  a 
                     questionnaire was given to randomly sampled 43 secondary school students to collect their views on how those 
                     illustrations impacted on their views on environmental protection. 
                     Keywords: Environmental Education and Protection, Themes, Ordinary Text, Set Book 
                      
                     1.   Introduction 
                     Environmental education refers to the process that allows individuals to explore environmental issues, engage in 
                     problem  solving,  and  take  action  to  improve  the  environment.  As  a  result,  individuals  develop  a  deeper 
                     understanding of environmental issues and have the skills to make informed and responsible decisions. On the 
                     other hand, environmental protection refers to any activity to maintain or restore the quality of environmental 
                     media  through  preventing  the  emission  of  pollutants  or  reducing  the  presence  of  polluting  substances  in 
                     environmental media for the benefit of both the environment and humans. (United Nations,1997).Environmental 
                     education as noted by Kimiti et al (2013) should assist individuals in taking action in environmental protection 
                     and improvement through various activities such as tree planting, cleaning of environment, participation in 
                     national and international environmental days and the whole discourse about management of ecosystems and 
                     sustainable  use  of  natural  environments  (Republic  of  Kenya,2014).  Environmental  degradation  due  to 
                     industrialization,  farming  activities,  transport,  deforestation,  wildlife  attacks,  improper  refuse  disposal  and 
                     pollution like in other parts of the world is prevalent in the Kenyan context, and the need to protect and conserve 
                     the environment for future generations from the worst calamities such as floods, expanding deserts, diseases and 
                     food insecurity (Kavila,2013). 
                                 The need to highlight environmental issues and consciousness have indeed prompted authors across 
                     the world to write. Notable examples of fiction novels are The Monkey Wrench Gang by Abbey Edward, The 
                     Lake, The River, and the Other Lake, by Amick Steve, The Last Good Chance By Barbash, Tom amongst many 
                     others. In Kenya, fiction novels with environmental themes are like Terrorists of the Aberdare and Different 
                     Colours by Ng’ang’a Mbugua. A thesis done by Kavila(2013) examines the novels; Terrorists of the Aberdare 
                     and  Different  Colours  and  discusses  causes  and  effects  of  environmental  degradation  and  human-wildlife 
                     conflict and proposes strategies to protect and conserve the environment for the betterment of current and future 
                     generations.. Since literature is a tool for education, Ng’ang’a Mbugua in his fictional works aims at educating 
                     his audience on environmental protection so as to reduce this imminent threat to flora and fauna that has direct 
                     dire  consequences  to  the  current  and  future  generations.  The  purpose  of  the  study  was  to  examine  the 
                     environmental themes in the Kidagaa Kimemwozea Swahili novel set book and to evaluate its environmental 
                     protection impact on learners. The study will be of help to students ,teachers, the public and policy makers in 
                     making the society be more responsive to environmental protection through environmental education. 
                                 
                      Studies on Ordinary Text Illustrations in Any Work Of Art.  
                     Available  research  has  it  that  ordinary  words  communicate  various  messages  and  therefore  assist  learners 
                     understand the content (Ombasa,2016). Novels, through ordinary text illustrations too communicate various 
                     themes to their audiences. Kidagaa Kimemwozea a Kiswahili category set book novel as a work of art also 
                     communicates various themes(Rono,2013).A theme on environment has also been brought out in the novel . A 
                     study  done  by  Kimiti  et  al(2013)  reveals  that  environmental  education  themes  have  been  incorporated  in 
                                                                                      24 
