           
                                                             
          Teachers’ Notes 
          written by Andrea Blake 
           
                               ONCE 
                          by Morris Gleitzman 
           
          Introduction 
           
          Once is an amazing and harrowing story. It is 1942 and Felix begins his story from 
          an orphanage – where he thinks his parents have placed him until they sort out their 
          ‘troubles’. Felix knows ‘things got difficult for Jewish booksellers’ but is not sure why. 
          One thing he is certain of is that he will return to his lovely old life one day, with his 
          books and his parents - once they come for him or once he finds them. But what 
          Felix begins to see and experience after making his escape challenges his youthful 
          naiveté and brings an end to his innocence in the most brutal of ways. The novel 
          follows Felix on his quest to find his parents and his search for understanding as he 
          comes face to face with death and evil. While ‘Jesus, the Virgin Mary, the Pope, 
          Father Ludwik and Adolf Hitler’ may let him down as protectors and sources of hope, 
          Felix’s faith in himself and others rarely diminishes. Throughout the novel, Felix’s 
          talents as a story teller highlight the humour, courage and strength this character 
          draws on to help himself and support those around him. Herded along the road to a 
          dreaded destination, hiding in a cellar with the heroic Barney, suffocating in a 
          crowded boxcar, distracting sad orphans or a cranky Nazi with a toothache, Felix is 
          a constant reminder of the power of imagination. Books, stories and Felix’s own 
          special notebook are integral to his life and serve as symbolic links in many parts of 
          Morris Gleitzman’s novel. During his journey, Felix forms an intense friendship with 
          Zelda, a young girl he rescues in a devastating scene when her parents have been 
          killed. He too is rescued at a later stage by Barney, a mysterious adult whom he 
          comes to know and appreciate very deeply. Many times in the novel it is 
          overwhelming to imagine the impact and implications of events Felix has lived 
          through. Towards the end of the novel - as Felix comes up with yet another scheme 
          to alleviate the suffering of those around him – this child has now become aware of 
          Death camps, hatred towards the Jews, the role of Adolf Hitler, enforced labour and 
          separation of families, and seen first-hand many other acts of violence and 
          oppression. The reader is saved from succumbing to despair and depression by the 
          resilience of Felix, even though we do not know what his escape from the terrible 
          train will bring. But he is focused on how “lucky” he is – ‘…everybody deserves to 
                                   1
