                                DOESTHEINERTIAOFABODYDEPEND
                                         UPONITSENERGY-CONTENT?
                                                          ByA.EINSTEIN
                                                          September 27, 1905
                                  Theresults of the previous investigation lead to a very interesting conclusion,
                              which is here to be deduced.
                                  I based that investigation on the Maxwell-Hertz equations for empty space,
                              together with the Maxwellian expression for the electromagnetic energy of space,
                              and in addition the principle that:—
                                  The laws by which the states of physical systems alter are independent of
                              the alternative, to which of two systems of coordinates, in uniform motion of
                              parallel translation relatively to each other, these alterations of state are referred
                              (principle of relativity).
                                  With these principles∗ as my basis I deduced inter alia the following result
                              (§ 8):—
                                  Let a system of plane waves of light, referred to the system of co-ordinates
                              (x,y,z), possess the energy l; let the direction of the ray (the wave-normal)
                              make an angle φ with the axis of x of the system. If we introduce a new system
                              of co-ordinates (ξ,η,ζ) moving in uniform parallel translation with respect to
                              the system (x,y,z), and having its origin of co-ordinates in motion along the
                              axis of x with the velocity v, then this quantity of light—measured in the system
                              (ξ,η,ζ)—possesses the energy
                                                                   1−vcosφ
                                                            l∗ = lp    c
                                                                         2  2
                                                                    1−v /c
                              where c denotes the velocity of light. We shall make use of this result in what
                              follows.
                                  Let there be a stationary body in the system (x,y,z), and let its energy—
                              referred to the system (x,y,z) be E . Let the energy of the body relative to the
                                                                 0
                              system (ξ,η,ζ) moving as above with the velocity v, be H0.
                                  Let this body send out, in a direction making an angle φ with the axis
                              of x, plane waves of light, of energy 1L measured relatively to (x,y,z), and
                                                                    2
                              simultaneously an equal quantity of light in the opposite direction. Meanwhile
                              the body remains at rest with respect to the system (x,y,z). The principle of
                                 ∗The principle of the constancy of the velocity of light is of course contained in Maxwell’s
                              equations.
                                                                    1
