                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                                                                                                                                                            TRAVEL BY LILLINGSTON 
                                                                                                                                                                                          TERMS & CONDITIONS 
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                                                                          TRAVEL BY LILLINGSTON BOOKING CONDITIONS 
                                                                                          The  booking  terms  and  conditions  outlined  below,  along  with  the  General  Information 
                                                                                          contained on our website will govern your (you, your) relationship with (we, our, us). Read 
                                                                                          through them carefully as they set out ours, as well as your respective rights and obligations. 
                                                                                          Your contract is  with  Travel  by  Lillingston  Ltd.  registered  in  England  under  the  Company 
                                                                                          Registration Number 10594904 whose office is registered in Four Folly Mews, 223a Portobello 
                                                                                          Road, London, W11 1LU, United Kingdom.  
                                                                                          We hold an Air Travel Organiser’s Licence (ATOL Number 11503).  
                                                                                          The following booking terms and conditions are only applicable to arrangements made in the 
                                                                                          UK, in which we agree to make or provide the service as part of our contract with you. All 
                                                                                          booking arrangements in this  booking  terms  and  conditions  will  be  referred  to  as  either 
                                                                                          “holiday”, “booking”, “contract”, “tour”, “package” and “arrangements”. In addition to that, 
                                                                                          “you” and “your” will be referred to all persons named on the booking (this includes anyone 
                                                                                          who is added on or substituted by at a later date). “We”, “us” and “our” will be referred to 
                                                                                          Travel by Lillingston Ltd.  
                                                                                          Start date of any arrangements booked with us will be referred to as “departure” or “departure 
                                                                                          date”. These booking conditions will not be applied to any arrangements which we (as your tour 
                                                                                          operator) book for you.  
                                                                                          1. YOUR HOLIDAY BOOKING  
                                                                                          To make a booking and to confirm it, the person making the booking (“group leader”) must 
                                                                                          provide us with all details required, including the payment referred to in Clause 2. The group 
                                                                                          leader may be asked to complete a booking form, and in which must be authorised to make the 
                                                                                          booking on the grounds of this booking condition by all persons named on this booking, 
                                                                                          including consent given by parents/guardians for members who are under 18 when bookings 
                                                                                          are made. By requesting our service to make any bookings, the group leader confirms that 
                                                                                          he/she is over the age of 18, is authorised to do so, and that you accept these booking 
                                                                                          conditions. The group leader is responsible for making any payments due to us. The completed 
                                                                                          booking form must be signed, and then be sent to us along with any payments required. Subject 
                                                                                          to availability, upon receiving all appropriate payments, we will confirm your holiday by issuing 
                                                                                          a confirmation invoice and booking reference. This invoice will be sent to the group leader. 
                                                                                          Kindly read through and check this invoice carefully as soon as you receive it.  
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                         Four Folly Mews,  
                                                                                         223A Portobello Road, 
                                                                                         London, W11 1LU 
                                                                                         LILLINGSTONCOLLECTION.COM 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
