       NOTE: This outline is a VERY general outline for fiction to move a story through 20 chapters.  
       Within the Community Novel Project, it is used to give writers a general idea of what point we are at in 
       the story, NOT to dictate exactly what has to happen during a particular chapter. As the story is 
       written, we may stray a bit from this outline, which is okay. Eventually we need to reach the end of 
       the book though, so try to move it along and help out the writers who come after you with what they 
       need to accomplish also. Please send suggestions to improve this general fiction outline to 
       estaley@tscpl.org. 
        
       Outline for 50,000 word novel of 20 chapters - 2500 words each 
            General advice for chapters and scenes 
            - Every chapter must contain action/reaction, conflict and decision (scenes too) 
            - Each scene has action, reaction, tension, stumbling block/road block 
            - Each scene starts with a goal - what does mc want, why, what willing to do for it? 
            - Decide what block will keep your character from reaching his or her goal - who or what 
            - Don’t start too intense, or have nothing to build to 
            - Peaks and valleys of tension/intensity - arrange in order of importance 
        
       1. -  intro main character 
       - spell out his/her goals 
       - at least one conflict 
        
       2. Event/motivating incident 
       -what happens in character’s life to set his course of actions 
       - reader learns what character wants 
           nd
       Intro 2  MC 
        
       3. by end, mc reaches his or her first turning point 
       - send mc into new or different direction 
        
                     st
       4. Decision to act -> 1  major event away 
        
       Type of scenes include cause-effect  and  
       action/reaction/conflict/decision. Just when one  
         event wraps up…. 
             
          nd
       5. 2  event 
        
       Advance/retreat scenes - Don’t let characters do more in one day than is credible - too many fast-paced 
       days leave readers out of breath - they need some breaks.  Description slows action. Use background to 
       ease out of a tense scene - new, calmer setting (night, dark, place of escape, breath sigh of relief).  
       Subtle transition into day, light, sense of hope, new day breaking is symbolic.  Humor is good transition 
       from tension too.  Transitions should be visual. 
       6. Lay groundwork/journey - Confront - Explore 
        
       (looking ahead: At mid-point, your mc’s should be at total cross-purposes.) 
