                                      
         IMPORTANT: Information CCEP requires on your paper invoice 
      
      The information contained in this page outlines requirements your invoice must meet in order to 
     receive payment from CCEP.  
         Failure to comply with these requirements may result in payment issues and delays, 
         including returned invoices.  
         Please ensure your Accounts Receivable Department is informed of these requirements in 
         order to avoid payment issues.  
      
       
     Absolutely necessary information required on your paper invoice: 
       1.  Your company name, address and bank account 
       2.  Your VAT registration number, if applicable 
       3.  Invoice number and invoice date 
       4.  Correct CCEP company name, “Bill-To” and delivery address 
       5.  Correct CCEP VAT Number  
       6.  Correct CCEP Purchase Order (PO) number. One PO, one invoice. 
       7.  Correct CCEP contact name 
       8.  Time of supply, if different from the invoice date 
       9.  Invoice Currency. If the invoice currency is different from the country currency, VAT amount 
         shall be converted in country currency 
       10. Breakdown and description of the goods / services, exactly as it is in your CCEP PO, if PO 
         issued. 
       11.  Quantity and unit price per item 
       12. Rate of VAT charged per item. If an item is VAT exempt or VAT zero-rated make clear no VAT 
         on these items 
       13. Total amount excluding VAT / total VAT amount / total amount including VAT 
       14. If the document is credit note, the number of the referred invoice  
      
      Additional help and information:  
         Do not send invoices prior to delivery of good(s)/service(s), as this will cause delays 
         in payment.  
         Do not send duplicate copies of your invoices, as our control procedures may keep us 
         from paying either one.  
         Do no submit invoices with manual alterations.  
         Avoid sending invoices with shading, as it may affect the quality of the scanning process.  
      
        
        
        
