                                                   Checklist for Critiquing a Novel 
                          
                          
                             ·   Conflict 
                                     o  Does your story begin with some sort of conflict—either internal or 
                                         external? 
                                     o  Does the beginning set up the bigger “conflict” of the entire novel, the 
                                         issue that drives your protagonist toward his/her end goal? 
                                     o  Is your protagonist conflicted or is embroiled in some external conflict? 
                                     o  Are there too many conflicts going on in the book? Too few? 
                                     o  Is there an overarching conflict present in the story that is key to the 
                                         premise and grows to a climax and resolution? 
                                     o  Does your protagonist face one conflict or obstacle after another (each 
                                         worse than the previous) that force him/her to have to make a tough 
                                         decision(s)? 
                                     o  Does the conflict serve the interest of the story or is it just thrown in the 
                                         book for excitement? 
                             ·   Plot 
                                     o  Does the overall plot come across clearly in the novel? 
                                     o  Is the plot goal for the book laid out from the start and does it resolve at 
                                         the end of the book satisfactorily? 
                                     o  Are there subplots in the book that work with the main plot? Are they also 
                                         resolved? 
                                     o  Are the setting, locale, time of year, date, etc., clearly and consistently 
                                         developed? 
                                     o  Is it easy to follow the passage of time from scene to scene? 
                                     o  Are the scenes strung together in a cohesive fashion and drive the plot? 
                                     o  Are there scenes in the book that do not serve the plot and don’t seem to 
                                         have a point? 
                                     o  Is the plot interesting and engaging? Are the themes and issues touched on 
                                         in the plot universal elements that readers will relate to? 
                             ·   Pacing 
                                     o  How does the pacing of the story feel? Does the book drag in spots due to 
                                         excessive narration or from uninteresting scenes? 
                                     o  Is the writing over-wordy or vague, slowing down the pace of the scenes? 
                                     o  Are sentences too long and/or repetitive? 
                                     o  Are the scenes moving at a good clip to keep interest or do they need 
                                         trimming? 
                                     o  In faster action scenes, does the pace speed up with shorter sentences and 
                                         paragraphs? 
                             ·   Tension 
                                     o  Is tension created at the outset of the book? 
                                     o  Is the protagonist compelling enough to heighten tension by the reader 
                                         caring about him/her? 
                                     o  Are scenes adeptly left hanging in order to create tension? 
