                  JSS                        Journal of Statistical Software
                                         August 2014, Volume 59, Issue 10.                 http://www.jstatsoft.org/
                                                         Tidy Data
                                                        Hadley Wickham
                                                              RStudio
                                                              Abstract
                           Ahuge amount of eﬀort is spent cleaning data to get it ready for analysis, but there
                        has been little research on how to make data cleaning as easy and eﬀective as possible.
                        This paper tackles a small, but important, component of data cleaning: data tidying.
                        Tidy datasets are easy to manipulate, model and visualize, and have a speciﬁc structure:
                        each variable is a column, each observation is a row, and each type of observational unit
                        is a table. This framework makes it easy to tidy messy datasets because only a small
                        set of tools are needed to deal with a wide range of un-tidy datasets. This structure
                        also makes it easier to develop tidy tools for data analysis, tools that both input and
                        output tidy datasets. The advantages of a consistent data structure and matching tools
                        are demonstrated with a case study free from mundane data manipulation chores.
                  Keywords: data cleaning, data tidying, relational databases, R.
                                                       1. Introduction
                  It is often said that 80% of data analysis is spent on the process of cleaning and preparing
                  the data (Dasu and Johnson 2003). Data preparation is not just a ﬁrst step, but must be
                  repeated many times over the course of analysis as new problems come to light or new data
                  is collected. Despite the amount of time it takes, there has been surprisingly little research
                  on how to clean data well. Part of the challenge is the breadth of activities it encompasses:
                  from outlier checking, to date parsing, to missing value imputation. To get a handle on the
                  problem, this paper focuses on a small, but important, aspect of data cleaning that I call data
                  tidying: structuring datasets to facilitate analysis.
                  The principles of tidy data provide a standard way to organize data values within a dataset.
                  Astandard makes initial data cleaning easier because you do not need to start from scratch
                  and reinvent the wheel every time. The tidy data standard has been designed to facilitate
                  initial exploration and analysis of the data, and to simplify the development of data analysis
                  tools that work well together. Current tools often require translation. You have to spend time
