                     Recommendation 6
                     ALIGNED INVOICE LAYOUT KEY
                     FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE
                     At its ninth session, held in June 1975, the Group ofThe eighteenth session was attended by a representative
                     Experts on Data Requirements and Documentation, sub-of the secretariat of the United Nations Commission on
                     sidiary organ of the ECE Working Party on Facilitation of             International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).  The following
                     International Trade Procedures, considered a draft aligned            specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-gov-
                     invoice for international trade which had been preparedernmental organizations were represented at the fourth
                     by an ad hoc Group led by the delegation of France.and eighteenth sessions of the Working Party: Interna-
                                                                                           tional Maritime Organization (IMO); General Agree-
                     The Groups of Experts agreed to submit a draft Recom-
                                                                                           ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)*; European Economic
                     mendation on the subject to the Working Party.  At its
                                                                                           Community (EEC); Conference of European Ministers of
                     fourth session in September 1975, the Working Party  –
                                                                                                                  **
                                                                                           Transport (CEMT); Customs Co-operation Council
                     noting that the recommended layout key would offer
                                                                                           (CCC); Central Office for International Railway Trans-
                     sufficient flexibility for adaption to various national,
                                                                                           port (OCTI) *; International Chamber of Commerce (ICC);
                     commercial and technical needs – decided to recommend
                                                                                           International Organization for Standardization (ISO);
                     that governments, members of the Economic Commis-
                                                                                           International Air Transport Association (IATA); Inter-
                     sion for Europe, should adopt an aligned invoice layout
                                                                                                                                          **
                                                                                           national Road Transport Union (IRTU); International
                     key for international trade based on this Recommenda-
                                                                                           Union of Railways (UIC);  International Chamber of
                     tion as an integral part of their respective national series
                     of aligned forms, that they should encourage its use in the           Shipping (ICS); International Civil Airports Association
                                                                                                    **
                                                                                           (ICAA) ; International Federation of Freight Forward-
                     greatest possible number of commercial transactions and
                                                                                           ers Associations (FIATA); International Railway Trans-
                     that the aligned invoice should be accepted by their
                                                                                                                      **
                                                                                           port Committee (CIT); and Society for Worldwide
                     competent authorities to complement or replace some or                                                                               *
                                                                                           Interbank Financial Telecommunication (S.W.I.F.T.).
                     all of the administrative documents required hitherto.
                                                                                           Representatives from the Korean Committee for Simpli-
                     The Working Party also recommended that governments
                                                                                           fication of International Trade Procedures (with head-
                     should report when and how they will be able to put the
                     Recommendation into effect, and requested the Executive               quarters located in the Republic of Korea) were also
                                                                                           present at the invitation of the secretariat.
                     Secretary of the ECE to take appropriate action in order
                     to ensure that the Recommendation is communicated to
                                                                                                              I. BACKGROUND
                     the governments of all other countries members of the
                     United Nations and to the international organizations
                     concerned.                                                            1. The commercial invoice is a key document in inter-
                                                                                           national trade.  In addition to playing an essential role in
                     At its eighteenth session in September 1983, the Working              the commercial transaction, it has an important function
                     Party adopted a number of amendments to the text of theas a course of information and as a supporting document
                     Recommendation and the illustration of the aligned in-for administrative procedures in the importing and, in
                     voice appended to it.                                                 many cases, the exporting country.
                     At the fourth and eighteenth session of the Working
                                                                                           2. The importance of the commercial invoice was borne
                     Party, representatives attended from: Austria; Belgium;
                                                                                           in mind when the original Layout Key for trade docu-
                               **                                             **
                     Bulgaria    ; Canada; Czechoslovakia; Denmark; Fin-
                                                                                           ments was designed and adopted in 1963.  A model form
                     land; France; German Democratic Republic; Germany;
                                                                                           for an aligned invoice was included in the “ECE Guide on
                                                       **
                     Federal Republic of; Greece; Hungary; Netherlands;
                                                                                           Simplification and Standarization of External Trade
                     Norway; Poland; Romania; Sweden; Switzerland; Tur-
                                                                                           Documents” (1966); in some countries national stand-
                     key; Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; United King-
                                                                                           ards based on that model have subsequently been adopted,
                     dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and United
                                                                                           or companies have included invoices in their series of
                     States of America.  Representatives from Australia; Ja-
                                                                                           aligned forms.  However, before agreement was reached
                                    *             **
                     pan; Nigeria and Kenya participated under Article 11
                                                                                           in 1975 on the first edition of the present Recommenda-
                                                                    1
                     of the Commission’s terms of reference.                               tion, no international standard had been developed.
                     Recommendation No. 6, second  edition, adopted by the Working Party   1  In the lists of countries and organizations one asterisk (*) denotes
                     on Facilitation of International Trade Procedures, Geneva, September  attendance at fourth session only; two asterisks (**) denote attendance at
                     1983, ECE/TRADE/148  [Edition 96.1].                                  eighteenth session only.
                                                                             Recommendation 6                                                             29
