            Leaflet of  documents required for your business travel purpose. 
            It is strongly recommended to submit a complete set of documents as per the below list of requirements in order to avoid 
            delays in visa processing. 
            Business travel: visiting a business/company to have meetings, to make business deals, to recruit, to train or other     
            work related activities. 
            Business visa travel purpose has to be confirmed by an invitation letter from a business/company based in Germany. 
            The decision to approve or refuse a visa is entirely up to the Diplomatic Mission. Please note: the Diplomatic Mission might 
            request you to submit missing / additional documents that may prolong the review time.  
            All documents have to be recent, not older than 1 month, and need to be provided for every Schengen visa application.  
            Applicants always have to bring and present their original documents also submit with the photocopies. 
            For Minors, please сheck the separate leaflet. 
                   nted Visa Application form (original)
            •   Pri
                All pages of the online application form need to be printed out.  Please sign the form in 3 designated places.
            •   Additional Information sheet (original)
                Document needs to be printed out, signed and submitted along with the visa application and its additional documents.
            •   Passport (original and 2 photocopies)
                Signed passport, at least 2 blank pages for visa purposes, must be valid for at least 90 days beyond the return date of
                the trip to the Schengen Area.
                (Extended passport may still be valid, but when older than 10 years the passport is no longer acceptable; in that case
                applicant first needs to apply for a new passport.)
            •   UK Residence permit (original and photocopy)
                UK Residence permit, endorsed in the passport or issued as a Biometrics card, must be valid for at least 90 days beyond
                the return date of the trip to the Schengen Area; C type visitor visa is not acceptable.
            •   Biometric Photograph (original)
                1 recent colour photograph, not more than 6 months old, on white or off-white background.
            •   Proof of occupation
                   o   Employer letter (original): recent (less than 1month), signed (not electronic), headed letter (addressed to the
                       Mission, name and position of the signee and confirming duration of employment, business relations with
                       German company, travel purpose, duration of business trip(s) and if applicable a guarantee to cover all travel
                       expenses including travel health insurance)
                o     Self- employment letter(original): recent (less than 1 month old), signed, headed letter(addressed to the
                      Mission, name and position of the signee and confirming applicant’s self-employment) and obtained from (if
                      applicable):
