                         Jul. 2008, Volume 5, No.7 (Serial No.44)                    US-China Education Review, ISSN154 8-6613, USA
                                                                                                                      
                                                                   The differences between novels and films 
                                                               —Enhance literature teaching by using films 
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                               BAO Bo 
                                                    (Foreign Language Department, Shaanxi Institute of Education, Xi’an Shaanxi 710061, China) 
                               Abstract: Many films are based on novels. However them uses dif, each ferent ways to of                                                                                   tell the similar 
                         stories. The paper discusses the differences from several aspects in terms of their nature, ways of narration, as well 
                         as the effect they bring about. It mainly focuses on the special benefits of using films in English language teaching. 
                         Finally, a sample film-based activity which could be used to enhance language classroom is illustrated.   
                               Key words: novels; films; English language teaching   
                                  
                                 In the twentieth century, there are two culturally dominant ways of experiencing fiction available to us: the 
                         visual forms of film and the prose forms of novel (Montgomery, et al., 1992, p. 191). Indeed, these two different 
                         media have gained millions of fans all over the world. ny liMaterary masterpieces have been represented through 
                         films. Victor Fleming’s Gone with the Wind (1939), Ann Lee’s Sense and Sensibility (1995), Joe Wright’sPride  
                         and Prejudice (2005) are all based on novels. Quite often, people like to compare the novel with the film that tells 
                         the same story, and many people are inclined to agree with the opinion that films could hardly defeat the novels in 
                         telling the same story. Presumably, on one hand, thims isainly becaus                                                          e of theth afactt it i  s the novel that 
                         introduces the story to the readers first. Therefore, wever hatthe author writes inst toryhe  occupies the readers’ 
                         mind and become the only “correct” way of telling a certain story. On the other hand, the paper conceives that the 
                         differences between novels and films by their very natu dreecide that these two forms of media will never create 
                         the same effects on presenting stories.   
                                   1. Important differences between films and novels 
                                 1.1 Formal differences: Visual image vs. verbal sign 
                                 The philosopher C. S. Peirce used the tesign and rms icon to explain the relationship between two things 
                         when one thing can represent another (Montgomery, 1992, p. 193). The term sign refers to the arbitrary 
                         relationship between two things, for example, a word “flower” can be a sign of a flower; also, a picture of a flower 
                         can be an icon of the flower which shows a less arbitrary relationship between the two. Obviously, a picture of a 
                         flower is much closer to a flower than the word “flower” (Monaco, 1981). As mediums of representation, film is 
                         made of icons, while prose if made of signs (Montgomery 1,992, p. 193). In other words, the images in the film 
                         have more direct and immediate relationship to what it describes, while the words seldom do. Additionally, the 
                         sound in the film could greatly enhance the audiences’ understanding. Therefore, it is true that film’s grasp of 
                                                                                 
                                                                                
                             BAO Bo (1981- ), M.A., Foreign Language Destitute ofpartment, Shaanxi In Education; research fields: applied linguistics, 
                         computer assisted language learning. 
                         58 
