                                   Information about your condition from 
                                   The British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS)  
                 
                You have been given this leaflet because you have been diagnosed with 
                urinary stones.  The aim of the leaflet is to provide you with advice on how 
                to modify your diet and fluid intake to reduce your risk of getting further 
                stones.   
                We have consulted specialist surgeons during its preparation, so it 
                represents best practice in UK urology.  You should use it in addition to any 
                advice already given to you.  
                To view the online version of this leaflet, type the text below into your web 
                browser: 
                http://www.baus.org.uk/_userfiles/pages/files/Patients/Leaflets/Stone diet.pdf 
                                                        Key Points 
                   •  Specific types of stone can be managed by measures aimed at the 
                       cause of your stone formation 
                   •  Generally, keeping your urine dilute & colourless reduces your risk 
                       of forming a further stone by almost one third (30 to 40%) 
                   •  In addition, a normal calcium, low-salt, low-protein dietary intake 
                       can reduce your risk of stone formation even further  
                How much do I need to drink? 
                Drinking plenty of fluid is the most 
                effective way of preventing stone 
                formation and reduces your risk of 
                stone formation by almost one third 
                (30 to 40%).  Not drinking enough 
                can cause your urine to become 
                concentrated, making stones more 
                likely to form. 
                 
                Try to drink two to three litres 
                (four to six pints) of fluid (water or squash) each day.  You should aim to 
                keep your urine colourless throughout the day.  This should give you a 
                urine output of at least two litres (four pints) per day.  If you have cystine 
                 
                                                  
                 Published: April 2017                                               Leaflet No: 16/114  Page: 1 
                  Due for review: April 2020       © British Association of Urological Surgeons (BAUS) Limited 
