                    The experts look ahead
                    Cramming more components
                    onto integrated circuits
                    With unit cost falling as the number of components per
                    circuit rises, by 1975 economics may dictate squeezing as
                    many as 65,000 components on a single silicon chip
                    By Gordon E. Moore
                    Director,  Research and Development Laboratories, Fairchild  Semiconductor
                    division of Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp.
                    The future of integrated electronics is the future of electron-    machine instead of being concentrated in a central unit.  In
                    ics itself.  The advantages of integration will bring about a      addition, the improved reliability made possible by integrated
                    proliferation of electronics, pushing this science into many       circuits will allow the construction of larger processing units.
                    new areas.                                                         Machines similar to those in existence today will be built at
                         Integrated circuits will lead to such wonders as home         lower costs and with faster turn-around.
                    computers—or at least terminals connected to a central com-
                                                                                       Present and future
                    puter—automatic controls for automobiles, and personal
                                                                                           By integrated electronics, I mean all the various tech-
                    portable communications equipment.  The electronic wrist-
                                                                                       nologies which are referred to as microelectronics today as
                    watch needs only a display to be feasible today.
                                                                                       well as any additional ones that result in electronics func-
                         But the biggest potential lies in the production of large
                                                                                       tions supplied to the user as irreducible units.  These tech-
                    systems.  In telephone communications, integrated circuits
                                                                                       nologies were first investigated in the late 1950’s.  The ob-
                    in digital filters will separate channels on multiplex equip-
                                                                                       ject was to miniaturize electronics equipment to include in-
                    ment.  Integrated circuits will also switch telephone circuits
                                                                                       creasingly complex electronic functions in limited space with
                    and perform data processing.
                                                                                       minimum weight.  Several approaches evolved, including
                         Computers will be more powerful, and will be organized
                                                                                       microassembly techniques for individual components, thin-
                    in completely different ways.  For example, memories built
                                                                                       film structures and semiconductor integrated circuits.
                    of integrated electronics may be distributed throughout the
                                                                                           Each approach evolved rapidly and converged so that
                                                                                       each borrowed techniques from another.  Many researchers
                    The author
                                                                                       believe the way of the future to be a combination of the vari-
                    Dr. Gordon E. Moore is one of                                      ous approaches.
                    the new breed of electronic
                                                                                           The advocates of semiconductor integrated circuitry are
                    engineers, schooled in the
                                                                                       already using the improved characteristics of thin-film resis-
                    physical sciences rather than in
                    electronics. He earned a B.S.                                      tors by applying such films directly to an active semiconduc-
                    degree in chemistry from the                                       tor substrate.  Those advocating a technology based upon
                    University of California and a
                                                                                       films are developing sophisticated techniques for the attach-
                    Ph.D. degree in physical
                                                                                       ment of active semiconductor devices to the passive film ar-
                    chemistry from the California
                    Institute of Technology. He was                                    rays.
                    one of the founders of Fairchild                                       Both approaches have worked well and are being used
                    Semiconductor and has been
                                                                                       in equipment today.
                    director of the research and
                    development laboratories since
                    1959.
                                                            Electronics, Volume 38, Number 8, April 19, 1965
