               
       
      Volvo Global Invoice specification for AP material rev. 06 
       
      This specification describes the Volvo application of the Global Invoice regarding 
      Automotive Products (AP). Global Invoice is an initiative of the joint Automotive Industry 
      and covers all types of EDI invoices and is based on the Edifact message standard. 
       
      The Volvo Global Invoice specification for AP material is a user profile of the Global Invoice 
      subset, called Global Invoice Message 2.0 - Odette Sweden, specified by the Swedish Odette 
      organisation currently published on www.odette.se. The AP specification will be primarily 
      used for EDI invoicing to Volvo units in Europe. 
       
      Volvo will use this specification in future implementations of EDI invoices based on the 
      Edifact standard. All older EDI relations currently in production will gradually be migrated to 
      this specification. 
       
      Although this specification is a user profile, it covers a number of options. The use of these 
      options is dependent on the local conditions and the requirements in each individual relation 
      between a supplier and a Volvo unit. Before implementing this specification, it is important to 
      analyse the current needs and to decide whether the options are applicable or not. Examples of 
      these options are; special charges, use of two currencies (invoicing and home currency), intra-
      EU-invoicing with no VAT amount specified, etc. The occurrence of options are further 
      described within this specification and in supporting guidelines published separately. 
       
      For further information and guidelines regarding this specification, please study the Volvo 
      EDI web site, www.volvo.com/edi  . 
       
      In this specification Volvo has also included information related to Self Billing Invoicing 
      (SBI). This SBI concept has been discussed a lot during the recent years within the 
      Automotive Industry. For the moment, Volvo has no intention to implement SBI for AP 
      material, but will in the future study the concept thoroughly and decide the conditions later.   
       
      The Volvo Global Invoice specification for Non Automotive products (NAP) will be specified 
      and published in a separate document. 
       
       
       
       
                         Document No:  9642-539201-06 
                           Replaces:  9642-539201-05 
                           Issued by:  Volvo IT, DE47509 
                             Date:  2013-06-11 
                        Application area:  Suppliers to Volvo units in Europe 
                           Validity:  Until further notice 
       
