                                                                  
                                        
                                        
             
       OUR HOLOCAUST 
             
             
       By Amir Gutfruend 
             
       Translated by Jessica Cohen 
             
       First published in Hebrew by Kinneret, 2001 
             
       English translation published by The Toby Press, 2006 
             
                                                
             
             
            ABOUT THE BOOK: 
             
                          This  novel  is  the  story  of Amir and his cousin Effi, two Israeli 
            children growing up in the Haifa suburbs in the 1970s who try to make sense 
            of the impact of the Holocaust on their family. The children of survivors, Amir 
            and Effi are repeatedly told that they are not “Old Enough” to understand what 
            went on “Over There.” But the cousins are obsessed with understanding: 
            They read library books, ask questions, snoop around, and read old letters, 
            piecing together whatever they can. Their primary sources of information 
            include an eccentric circle of relatives and acquaintances: penny-pinching 
            Grandpa Lolek, Attorney Perl of the hardware store, and Gershon Klima the 
            sewer cleaner. As time passes, Amir and Effi pursue their own lives: Amir gets 
            married and has a son of his own, and Effi goes on to become a doctor. This 
            book, which flashes forward and back between childhood and adulthood, 
            offers a penetrating exploration of the impact of the Shoah on Israeli society 
            and on childhood consciousness.  
             
             
            ABOUT THE AUTHOR: 
             
                 Amir Gutfruend was born in Haifa in 1963. After studying applied 
            mathematics at the Technion, he joined the Israeli Air Force. Our Holocaust 
            was his first novel. It was awarded the Buchman Prize by Yad Vashem. His 
            second novel, Shoreline Mansions, won the Sapir Prize in 2003, and his third 
            novel, The World, a Little Later, was recently published in Israel. Gutfreund 
            lives in the Galilee with his wife, a clinical psychologist, and their two children. 
             
             
             
             
             
                                                                     1
              www.makomisrael.org
            
