          Linked Data - The Story So Far
          Christian Bizer, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany
          Tom Heath, Talis Information Ltd, United Kingdom
          Tim Berners-Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
          This is a preprint of a paper to appear in: Heath, T., Hepp, M., and Bizer, C. (eds.). Special
          Issue on Linked Data, International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems
          (IJSWIS). http://linkeddata.org/docs/ijswis-special-issue
          Abstract
          The term Linked Data refers to a set of best practices for publishing and connecting
          structured data on the Web. These best practices have been adopted by an increasing
          number of data providers over the last three years, leading to the creation of a global data
          space containing billions of assertions - the Web of Data. In this article we present the
          concept and technical principles of Linked Data, and situate these within the broader context
          of related technological developments. We describe progress to date in publishing Linked
          Data on the Web, review applications that have been developed to exploit the Web of Data,
          and map out a research agenda for the Linked Data community as it moves forward.
          Keywords: Linked Data, Web of Data, Semantic Web, Data Sharing, Data Exploration
          1. Introduction
          The World Wide Web has radically altered the way we share knowledge by lowering the
          barrier to publishing and accessing documents as part of a global information space.
          Hypertext links allow users to traverse this information space using Web browsers, while
          search engines index the documents and analyse the structure of links between them to
          infer potential relevance to users' search queries (Brin & Page, 1998). This functionality has
          been enabled by the generic, open and extensible nature of the Web (Jacobs & Walsh,
          2004), which is also seen as a key feature in the Web's unconstrained growth.
          Despite the inarguable benefits the Web provides, until recently the same principles that
          enabled the Web of documents to flourish have not been applied to data. Traditionally, data
          published on the Web has been made available as raw dumps in formats such as CSV or
          XML, or marked up as HTML tables, sacrificing much of its structure and semantics. In the
          conventional hypertext Web, the nature of the relationship between two linked documents is
          implicit, as the data format, i.e. HTML, is not sufficiently expressive to enable individual
          entities described in a particular document to be connected by typed links to related
          entities.
          However, in recent years the Web has evolved from a global information space of linked
          documents to one where both documents and data are linked. Underpinning this evolution is
          a set of best practices for publishing and connecting structured data on the Web known as
