                                                          
                                   
      A TRUMPET IN THE WADI        
            
      By Sami Michael 
            
      Translated by Yael Lotan 
            
      First published in Hebrew by Am Oved, 1987 
            
      English translation published by Simon & Schuster, 2002 
            
      Study guide by Ilana Kurshan 
                                          
            
            
            
           ABOUT THE BOOK: 
            
           This novel is the story of two Christian Arab sisters who live in the Arab 
           quarter of Haifa with their widowed Christian mother and irascible Egyptian 
           grandfather. Huda, the narrator, falls in love with Alex, the Russian Jewish 
           immigrant who plays his trumpet on the roof of their building. Her younger 
           sister Mary rejects the advances of Zuhair, the son of their difficult Muslim 
           landlord, and chooses instead her uninteresting but dependable cousin 
           Wahid. The story of the two sisters' coming-of-age is narrated against the 
           backdrop of escalating Arab-Israeli tensions in the months leading up to the 
           1982 war between Israel and Lebanon, which ultimately brings Huda's 
           romance to a tragic end. 
                
                
            
           ABOUT THE AUTHOR: 
            
                
           Sami Michael was born in Baghdad, Iraq in 1926. He served as an advocate 
           against the oppressive national regime during World War II, before fleeing to 
           Iran and then to Israel in 1948. Michael studied Arabic Literature and 
           Psychology at Haifa University. For 25 years, he worked as a hydrologist, 
           mainly on the Syrian border, and wrote about his experiences. He published 
           his first novel in 1973. Michael is the author of eight novels. He has received 
           many literary awards, including the WIZO Prize, the ACUM Prize, the Brenner 
           Prize, the Ze`ev Prize for children`s literature, an IBBY Award, the Israel Prize 
           for Literature and the President`s Prize for Lifetime Achievement (2005). The 
           film adaptation of A Trumpet in the Wadi won the 2001 Israel Academy Film 
           Award for Best Drama. For his work for peace, he has been honored by the 
           UN-supported Society for International Development, and the Association for 
           Promotion of Peace in the Middle East (Italy), and has been awarded 
           honorary doctorates by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem (1995), Ben-
           Gurion University of the Negev (2000), Tel Aviv University (2002) for his 
           literary work and contribution to inter-communal reconciliation. He lives in 
           Haifa, Israel.  
            
            
            
                                                              1
           
