         Sepsis Information Leaﬂet 
         Sepsis is a life-threatening condition triggered by infection 
         that affects the function of the organs. It is treated most 
         effectively if recognised early.
         Signs & symptoms of infection:
         Infections are often suspected when a person develops a 
         temperature and feels unwell. 
         A high temperature is > 38°C. A low temperature, ≤ 35.5°C, is 
         also of concern but do check your technique.
         Watch out for loved ones who have taken paracetamol as while 
         it may lower the temperature it does not treat any underlying 
         infection. Look for the other signs and symptoms of infection 
         listed in the table.
                                These are involuntary movements of the body that look a bit 
          Rigors
                                like seizures but are not associated with loss of consciousness.
                                Rigors occur when the body temperature rapidly changes.
          ‘Flu-like’ illness    Many infections present with non-specific signs and 
                                symptoms including a high temperature, aches and pains, 
                                severe fatigue, and loss of appetite.
          Respiratory Tract  Cough/green sputum and/or breathlessness
          infection
          Intra-abdominal       Unexplained abdominal pain/distension associated with some 
          infection             ‘flu-like’ symptoms
          Womb infection        Lower abdominal pain/discomfort that is constant, with or 
                                without unpleasant discharge and some ‘flu-like’ symptoms
          Septicaemia or        Feeling very unwell often with vomiting and/or diarrhea 
          blood poisoning  and/or some ‘flu-like’ symptoms. Agitation and/or confusion 
                                are often present particularly in the older person. Young 
                                adults often complain of severe leg pain and are unable to 
                                stand or walk properly.
          Cellulitis/skin or    Painful, red, and swollen skin. The affected area is hot to 
          wound infection       touch compared with unaffected areas. 
                                There may or may not be pus.
                                Recent onset exquisitely painful skin that does not look 
                                infected but is associated with feeling unwell often with 
                                vomiting and diarrhea and ‘flu-like’ symptoms needs to be 
                                urgently investigated.
          Meningitis            Severe headache, neck stiffness, intolerance of bright lights. 
                                This may or may not be associated with a rash. Acute 
                                confusion or agitation may also occur.
          Urinary tract         New onset frequent passing of small amounts of urine 
          infection             associated with burning discomfort. 
                                Flank pain may also occur.
