        RT HON MARK FRANCOIS MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR RAYLEIGH & WICKFORD 
           
                                                               
                                            HOUSE OF COMMONS 
                                                           
                                               LONDON SW1A 0AA 
          Sir Graham Brady MP 
          Chairman of the 1922 Committee  
          House of Commons 
          Westminster  
          SW1A 0AA 
           
          8 April 2019 
           
          Dear Sir Graham, 
           
          Enough is enough!  If she goes by Wednesday we can Leave on Friday 
           
          I am writing to you in a personal capacity, to express my sincere belief that Theresa May should now 
          resign as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.  If she will not do this, then I must ask that you and 
          your colleagues on the Executive of the 1922 Committee establish an informal ‘Indicative Vote’ of 
          confidence in the Prime Minister, immediately prior to this Wednesday’s meeting of the Committee, so 
          that colleagues have an opportunity to demonstrate that they have lost faith in her leadership.  My reasons 
          for asking this of you, relate both to the existential future of our Party and the destiny of our Country and 
          they are given below.  
           
          In short, we are living in a world gone mad.  A Conservative Prime Minister, who voted Remain, egged 
          on by a coterie of neo-Federalist Civil Servants and a powerful Remainiac cabal in the Cabinet, has tried, 
          – and failed three times – to pass a Draft Treaty through the House of Commons which would lock us 
          into a Customs Union forever.  Meanwhile, two Tory Privy Councillors, who have now been effectively 
          disowned by their own local Associations, openly connive with two Senior Labour Select Committee 
          Chairmen, to ram a highly contentious Bill, deliberately designed to frustrate Brexit, through the House 
          of Commons in under four hours, by literally one vote.  All this flies directly in the face of the democratic 
          decision of 17.4 million UK citizens to leave the European Union.  It even resulted in a heroic filibuster 
          in the House of Lords on Thursday by some 50 unelected, but mainly Tory Peers, fighting to preserve 
          our democracy, as undermined by the elected House. 
           
          Meanwhile, in a situation where any concept of collective responsibility disintegrated weeks ago, the so 
          called “Eurosceptics” in the Cabinet do absolutely nothing (save consume vast quantities of pizza).  Riven 
          by personal ambition, they keep their heads firmly below the parapet, many of them hoping that by 
          “sitting out” this great battle for the destiny of our Country, they will somehow inherit the crown.  They 
          won’t.  This is because, as a rule of thumb, MPs, let alone our Party Members, do not generally vote for 
          those they no longer respect.   
           
          So, Sir Graham, having been totally let down by our own “Officer Class” in the Cabinet, who continue 
          to cower back at the Chateau, it now clearly falls to the “poor bloody infantry” of the Conservative 
          backbenches – and specifically the Executive of the 1922 Committee – to prevent us being forced into a 
          Customs Union with Labour support, which is completely at variance with the Manifesto on which we 
          were all elected to Parliament and which would effectively mean we remain in the EU, utterly contrary 
          to the spirit of the 2016 Referendum and the democratically expressed wish of the British people. 
              Serving the communities of Ashingdon, Canewdon, Hawkwell, Hockley, Hullbridge, Nevendon, Paglesham, 
                            Rawreth, Rayleigh, Shotgate, South Fambridge, Stambridge & Wickford. 
