                                                                                                         
                                                                                                LED-it-GO 
                                         Leaking (a lot of) Data from Air-Gapped Computers via the (small) Hard Drive LED 
                                                                                                         
                                                             Mordechai Guri, Boris Zadov, Eran Atias,Yuval Elovici 
                                                                            Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 
                                                                               Cyber Security Research Center 
                                                         gurim@post.bgu.ac.il; borisza@gmail.com; elovici@bgu.ac.il 
                                                             Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vIu8ld68fc 
                                Abstract 
                                In this paper we present a method which allows attackers to covertly leak data from isolated, 
                                air-gapped computers. Our method utilizes the hard disk drive (HDD) activity LED which 
                                exists in most of today’s desktop PCs, laptops and servers. We show that a malware can 
                                indirectly control the HDD LED, turning it on and off rapidly (up to 5800 blinks per second) – 
                                a rate that exceeds the visual perception capabilities of humans. Sensitive information can be 
                                encoded and leaked over the LED signals, which can then be received remotely by different 
                                kinds of cameras and light sensors. Compared to other LED methods, our method is unique, 
                                because it is also covert - the HDD activity LED routinely flickers frequently, and therefore the 
                                user may not be suspicious to changes in its activity. We discuss attack scenarios and present 
                                the necessary technical background regarding the HDD LED and its hardware control. We also 
                                present various data modulation methods and describe the implementation of a user-level 
                                malware, that doesn't require a kernel component. During the evaluation, we examine the 
                                physical characteristics of different  colored HDD LEDs (red, blue, and white) and tested 
                                different types of receivers: remote cameras, 'extreme' cameras, security cameras, smartphone 
                                cameras,  drone  cameras,  and  optical  sensors.  Finally,  we  discuss  hardware  and  software 
                                countermeasures for such a threat. Our experiment shows that sensitive data can be successfully 
                                leaked from air-gapped computers via the HDD LED at a maximum bit rate of 4000 bit/s (bits 
                                per second), depending on the type of receiver and its distance from the transmitter. Notably, 
                                this speed is 10 times faster than the existing optical covert channels for air-gapped computers. 
                                These rates allow fast exfiltration of encryption keys, keystroke logging, and text and binary 
                                files. 
                                 
                                                                                           I.     INTRODUCTION 
                                In the modern cyber era, attackers have proven that they can breach many organizations thought 
                                to  be  secured.  They  employ  sophisticated  social  engineering  methods  and  exploit  0-day 
                                vulnerabilities in order to infiltrate the target network, while bypassing defense measures such 
                                as intrusion detection and prevention systems (IDS/IPS), firewalls, antivirus programs, and the 
                                like. For that reason, when highly sensitive information is involved, so-called air-gap isolation 
                                is used. In air-gap isolation, a network is kept separate, physically and logically, from public 
                                networks such as the Internet. Air-gapped networks are commonly used in military defense 
                                systems, critical infrastructure, banks and the financial sector, and others industries [1] [2].  
                                But despite the high degree of isolation, even air-gapped network are not immune to breaches. 
                                In recent years it has been shown that even air-gapped networks can become compromised. In 
                                order to breach such networks, attackers have used complex attack vectors, such as supply chain 
                                attacks, malicious insiders, and social engineering. While the most well-known breach cases 
                                are Stuxnet [3] and agent.btz [4], other attacks have also been reported [5] [6] [3] [7] [8].    
